
--- PAGE 1 ---
Learning based lower limb joint
kinematic estimation using open
source IMU data
Benjamin Hur1,Sunin Baek1, Inseung Kang3 & Daekyum Kim1,2
This study introduces a deep learning framework for estimating lower-limb joint kinematics using
inertial measurement units (IMUs).While deep learning methods avoid sensor drift, extensive
calibration, and complex setup procedures, they require substantial data.To meet this demand,
we leveraged an open-source dataset to develop and evaluate three training approaches.The first
involved training a model exclusively on data from a single user, resulting in high accuracy for that
individual only.The second approach trained a model on data from multiple users to generalize across
individuals; however, demonstrated lower accuracy due to variations in gait patterns across users.The
third approach added transfer learning to the second, improving estimation accuracy for new users
through fine-tuning with a small portion of their data.This model overcame the limitations of the
previous methods’ dependency on extensive data collection, and achieved comparable performance to
inverse kinematics, making it an effective solution for diverse populations.Additionally, our analysis on
IMU combinations suggests that IMUs placed on the femur and calcaneus are the best for most cases.
This framework not only reduces the need for extensive data collection but also enhances personalized
gait analysis, enabling more efficient and accessible applications in both clinical assessments and real-
world environments for broader use.
Lower-limb joint kinematic estimation using inertial measurement units (IMUs) holds a great promise in
gait biomechanics as IMUs provide a low-cost and easy-to-use gait assessment tool for clinical populations
(e.g., stroke or cerebral palsy)1,2. Furthermore, estimated joint kinematics can provide information about an
individual’s postural stability, which has implications to developing tools for fall detection and prevention in the
aging population3–5. Given that joint kinematics can provide rich and holistic information about an individual’s
gaitqualityandstability6,7,severalrecentlower-limbwearabledevices,suchasroboticexoskeletonsandexosuits,
have integrated IMUs into their hardware8–10.
Previously,analyticalmethodswerecommonlyusedtoestimatelower-limbjointkinematicsbasedoninverse
kinematics using IMUs11–13. However, these approaches require IMUs to be located on each individual limb13,14,
introducing exhaustive pre-setup requirements (e.g., aligning and calibrating IMUs for each subject). This
challengescalesgreatlyespeciallyintheclinicalpopulationwheredatacollectioncanbeexpensive.Additionally,
IMU-based inverse kinematics suffer from long-term signal drift, primarily due to accumulated errors from
time-varying biases in integrating acceleration data12,13.
Recently, data-driven approaches have been widely used to address these native challenges that analytical
methods have. One major benefit of using a data-driven approach is that it can reduce the total number of
required IMUs by automatically extracting the kinematic relationship between different limb segments. This
strategy can also potentially mitigate IMU drift by compensating for inherent noise in IMU signals15,16. One
study generated synthetic inertial data obtained from a clinical marker-based motion tracking database and
used it to train a 1D convolutional neural network (1D-CNN) and a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) for
estimating joint kinematics17. LSTM architecture has been used widely in recent literature to estimate joint
kinematics in other motor tasks such as Yoga, Golf, and Swimming18. Similarly, Deep Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Network (DeepConvLSTM) has been utilized in various joint kinematic estimation applications such as
estimation during walking and running19.
Onemajorbottleneckforadeeplearningstrategyisitsrequirementforalargesetofdata20.Developingthese
deep learning models for various activities generally involve a full optical motion capture(OMC) data collection
with IMUs21,22. For clinical populations, this OMC data collection can be challenging due to the limited time
1Korea University, School of Mechanical Engineering, 02841 Seoul, South Korea. 2Korea University, School of
Smart Mobility, 02841 Seoul, South Korea. 3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh,PA15213,USA. email:inseung@cmu.edu;daekyum@korea.ac.kr
OPEN
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 1 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports

--- PAGE 2 ---
that each patient can endure. Time-synchronizing and manually labeling of collected OMC and IMU data are
also labor-intensive.
To address these challenges, leveraging open-source datasets can be a possible strategy. In domains such
as computer vision and natural language processing, researchers have been leveraging open-source datasets,
substantially reducing the time and effort required for data collection and manual labeling23–25. These datasets
also provide benchmarks to both objectively and quantitatively evaluate a developed algorithm. For joint
kinematic estimation, there are several existing open-source datasets that consist of time-synchronized OMC
andIMUdata.Thesedatacovervariouslower-limbmotortaskssuchassit-to-stand,stand-to-walk,level-ground
walking, stairs ascent and descent, ramp ascent and descent, side-step, heel raise, squat, and squat jump26–31.
However, despite the advantages of using open-source datasets in creating deep learning models, they have
not been utilized to estimate lower-limb kinematics. One challenge that limits the use of these datasets in deep
learning models is to accommodate variances exhibited across individuals during different tasks. For example,
variations in each individual’s joint lengths and gait patterns can cause the model to perform poorly when
deploying a trained model to new users13. While transfer learning can potentially reduce estimation errors for
new users1,18, this method is still new in the field and needs to be validated rigorously. Another challenge in
the field is the lack of clear guidance in handling open-source datasets towards training a deep learning model.
The lack of a unified and holistic understanding in processing and analyzing a dataset leads to inconsistent
interpretations across studies. This makes it challenging to benchmark model results and limits researchers to
select the proper algorithm for each application. Thus, it is evident that developing a more generalizable model
and a systematic approach to handling open-source data for IMU-based kinematic estimation is critical and
beneficial for the field.
In this work, we present a deep learning framework that leverages an existing open-source dataset for IMU-
based joint kinematic estimation during walking. We systematically compared different models trained with
individual user data and those trained without it, providing insights into how model performance varies with
different training approaches. We also showed that transfer learning enables researchers to efficiently utilize
open-source datasets, minimizing the need for extensive data collection for their own specific motor tasks.
Lastly, through comparative analysis, we determined the optimal number of IMUs and their locations. Figure 1
outlines the general flowchart for deep learning model development using IMU and OMC data. Our framework
Fig. 1. General flowchart for deep learning model development using IMU and OMC data. The workflow
begins with the preprocessing of both open-source and collected datasets. The open-source dataset is then
employed to train CNN/LSTM models aimed at estimating joint kinematics through both user-individualized
and user-generalized methods. Following this, the user-generalized model serves as the foundation for the
transfer learning approach (user-adaptive method), which is utilized to evaluate the model’s adaptiveness.
Additionally, the collected dataset is used to train LSTM models specifically for user-adaptive methods.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 2 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 3 ---
will provide meaningful insight into helping researchers to effectively use open-source datasets in estimating
joint kinematics for different target applications.
Methods
Open-source data
For this study, we used an open-source gait data that included IMU(MTw Awinda, Xsens North America
Inc., Culver City, CA, USA) and OMC(Motion Analysis Corporation, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) from 11 healthy
individuals (9 males and 2 females)27. In this data, subjects had an average age of 27.9 ± 6.7 years and a body
mass index of 23.7 ± 2.4 kg/m2
. This dataset was specifically chosen for its comprehensive representation of
lower-limb movements using both IMUs and OMC. The dataset consisted of the following protocol: 1) 5-second
calibration pose, 2) 10 minutes of 5-meter straight walking with a 180◦
turn, 3) additional 5-second calibration
pose, and 4) 10 minutes of lower-extremity movements. Each participant was equipped with 8 IMUs located on
the torso, pelvis, tibia, femur, and calcaneus to record accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer signals at
a sampling rate of 100 Hz. However, for participants(denoted as subjects27) 6 and 10, data were sampled at 40
Hz. All OMC data were consistently recorded at 100 Hz sampling rate. We excluded data from participants 5,
9, 10, and 11 due to data corruption, including missing IMU data and synchronization issues between the IMU
and OMC. For participant 6, who had a reduced sampling rate on the IMUs, we upsampled the accelerometer,
gyroscope, and magnetometer data provided by the IMU using linear interpolation to match the OMC.
Data preprocessing
Accurate time synchronization of IMU and OMC data is crucial for precise kinematics analysis. However, open-
source datasets often lack time synchronization and have varying lengths between OMC and IMU data. As for
the dataset we used in this study, IMU data extended beyond the OMC data. To address this issue, we processed
thedatatoensureaccuratealignmentbetweenIMUandOMCdata.First,wederivedquaternionrepresentations
from the rotation matrices of both the IMU data and the OMC marker data. Next, we applied a sliding window
in time to the quaternion representation of the IMU data, using a window size matching that of the OMC
marker quaternion data. To align the windowed IMU data with the OMC quaternion data, we calculated both
the quaternion shortest angle and Euclidean distances between the datasets. Interestingly, the results from both
methods were nearly identical. We opted to use the quaternion shortest angle as it is the mathematically correct
way to measure distances in orientation space described by quaternions. The starting time point of the window
with the smallest quaternion shortest angle was chosen as the synchronization point.
Additionally, we confirmed that time synchronization was successfully completed by comparing the yaw
angle data of the torso IMU to the walking model generated in OpenSim. We focused on key moments during
turning (start, halfway, and end) and made adjustments as necessary to ensure precise synchronization.
Theopen-sourcedatasetprovidescontinuousrecordingsoflower-limbmovements,inwhichtheparticipants
perform repeated sequences of straight walking, turning, and resuming straight walking. Since our focus was
on kinematics during straight walking, we extracted only the straight walking segments from the dataset and
excluded the corner sections. This approach aligns with general clinical gait assessments, such as the 10-meter
walktest,whichinvolveonlystraightwalking32.Additionally,thedirectionandmethodofturningvariedamong
participants,withsomechangingdirectionwithoutstoppingwhileothersstoppedtorotateinplace,introducing
variance. To focus on consistent gait patterns, we excluded the rotation and turning segments.
We first analyzed the yaw angle data of the torso-mounted IMU at each time point. To calculate the yaw
angle at time = T, we added up the yaw angle differences at each timestep, starting from time = 0. Specifically,
we calculated the change in yaw angle from time = 0 to time = 0.01, then from time = 0.01 to time = 0.02, and
so on, up to the change from time = T-1 to time = T. By summing all these yaw angle differences, we obtained
the total yaw angle change from time = 0 to time = T. This angle was used to analyze the walking direction. We
then found segments of straight walking by selecting periods where the yaw angle remained within the range of
n × π ± 30◦
(where n is an integer), inferring minimal lateral rotation. These segments were then categorized
and analyzed as straight walking data.
ToensureconsistencyacrossindividualsinthedatasetandminimizepotentialbiasesfromvariationsinIMU
placement, we normalized the IMU data before inputting it into our deep learning models. This step involved
converting the IMU rotation matrix data into Euler angles to standardize orientation representation. We then
normalized the accelerations, the angular velocities, and the Euler angles, to have zero mean and unit variance.
Since all participants in the dataset performed standardized walking tests with consistent IMU placements, we
assessed that normalizing the Euler angles would effectively capture the changes in orientation for each axis
within the predefined range of motion observed during the tests. By standardizing these angles, we aimed to
ensure the model could focus on relative orientation changes rather than absolute values, which is particularly
useful for identifying movement patterns. This process enables more accurate comparisons across subjects
and enhances the deep learning model’s ability to generalize from the training data. The entire preprocessing
workflow was conducted using Matlab R2023b(The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
Data collection for model adaptability verification
We collected additional data to evaluate our user-adaptive model, which applies transfer learning to unseen data
using a pre-trained model and an independent dataset. Our dataset includes IMU and OMC data from three
individuals performing a 5-minute session of 3 meters straight walking and 180◦
turns at a self-selected pace.
Before walking, the participants were told to do a 5-second calibration pose to perform marker-to-segment
calibration via Opensim static marker position calibration. Eight IMUs (Xsens DOT, Xsens North America
Inc., Culver City, CA, USA) were placed at the same locations and their coordinate axes were manually aligned
according to the same local frame orientations described in the open-source dataset. Each IMU’s orientation
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 3 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 4 ---
data, originally expressed in the IMU global reference frame, were rotated into the local laboratory reference
frame (OMC frame). Specifically, we first converted the IMU’s Euler angles into a rotation matrix. Then we
multiplied this rotation matrix to the transformation matrix, which is defined by how the IMU global frame
is oriented relative to the local laboratory reference frame. By multiplying these matrices, we obtained a new
rotation matrix that represents the IMU’s orientation in the local laboratory reference frame (OMC frame).
The OMC data (OptiTrack, NaturalPoint Inc. Corvallis, OR, USA) were sampled at 100 Hz. The accelerometer,
gyroscope, and magnetometer signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 60 Hz and were interpolatedovertime
to match the sampling rate of 100Hz. For this collected dataset, we performed preprocessing steps of extracting
straight walking and normalizing IMU data.
Deep learning
In developing our model for estimating lower-limb kinematics during gait, we used Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs) networks, which are widely used and are proven to
be effective in deep learning applications for joint kinematic estimation26,33. CNN are renowned for their ability
to extract features through convolutional filters, making them adept at identifying spatial hierarchies in data.
This capability is particularly beneficial for analyzing the complex patterns present in kinematic data34. LSTM
excel at capturing temporal dependencies by using information from previous time steps to enhance current
predictions, which makes them especially suited for the sequential nature of gait data35. To optimize these
models, we employed the Adam optimizer, with a set learning rate of 0.001. The determination of the best epoch
for each model was carried out by incrementing the epoch count in steps of 200, starting from 500 and capping
at 3,000 epochs. Early stopping was applied if the validation loss did not decrease at the subsequent epoch
increment. This approach allowed us to methodically identify the epoch at which the model achieved the lowest
root mean square error (RMSE) on validation data, ensuring optimal model performance without overfitting.
In constructing our models to estimate lower-limb kinematics, we processed the data from 8 IMUs to have
72 variables for each time step as a deep learning input, encompassing x, y, z measurements of acceleration,
gyroscope, and Euler angles. Figure 2 illustrates the schematic diagram for both the LSTM and CNN models.
For the LSTM model, a structure with hidden dimensions of 128 and three layers were used to create the model.
For the CNN model, a sequence of 1D convolution layers was used. The first layer consisted of a 1D convolution
with24channelsandakernelsizeof5,selectedtocapturetheessentialfeatureswithoutexcessivecomputational
load. The second and third layer used 1D convolutions with 8 and 10 channels respectively, maintaining the
same kernel size to ensure consistency in feature extraction across layers. Each convolution step used the ReLU
activation function to introduce non-linearity and enhance model learning capabilities. Additionally, sliding
window technique was applied to the input data. Window size was set to 50 (0.5 seconds). This window size
ensures that the input data does not contain data of a whole gait, so that the model is able to estimate joint
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram for (a) LSTM and (b) CNN models. Total of eight IMUs, positioned on the torso,
pelvis, bilateral femurs, tibias, and calcanei, are used as model inputs. The model outputs are the bilateral
sagittal, frontal, and transverse hip, sagittal knee, and sagittal ankle joint angles.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 4 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 5 ---
kinematicswithoutrequiringeverypartofdatafromagait.Theslidingstridelengthwassetto25(0.25seconds)
so that each data contributes to the model consistently.
Weevaluatedthreedifferentmethodsofselectingtrainingdatatodevelopdeeplearningmodelsthatestimate
lower-limb kinematics: the ‘user-individualized method’, the ‘user-generalized method’, and the ‘user-adaptive
method’. Each approach was designed to tackle the inherent challenges of kinematic estimation from different
perspectives.
• User-individualizedmethod(UI):Inthisapproach,themodelistrainedusingthefirst80%ofeachparticipant’s
data, with the remaining 20% reserved for testing. Additionally, 20% of the training data is set aside as a val-
idation set. This method focuses on optimizing the model’s performance for known participants. However,
this method may be limited in its ability to generalize to new data(participants).
• User-generalized method(UG): Unlike the user-individualized method, this approach trains the model using
data from a specific group of participants (1, 2, 3, 4, and 6), validates it with data from another participant(7),
and subsequently tests it with data from a final participant (8). This method aims to assess the model’s ability
to generalize to new, unseen individuals.
• User-adaptive method(UA): This method combines the strengths of the user-individualized and user-gener-
alized methods while minimizing their weaknesses to enhance generalizability without sacrificing perfor-
mance. It starts with a model pre-trained using the user-generalized method and then fine-tunes it with data
from a target participant. By adjusting the train-test split ratios and employing a detailed epoch selection
process (from 1 up to a maximum of 15 epochs), this approach aims to achieve both the generalization of the
user-generalized method and the specificity of the user-individualized method.
IMU combination
CNN and LSTM were trained using different combinations of IMUs to cover all possible configurations of the
pelvis, both tibias, femurs, and calcanei. This approach allowed us to assess both the individual contributions of
each IMU and their combined effects on model performance. We tested this using all three methods-UI, UG,
and UA approaches-to develop a total of 378 LSTM models, with 126 models created for each method.
Inverse kinematics
Forthegroundtruthvaluesofjointangles,weusedOMC-basedinversekinematicscalculatedthroughOpenSim
4.4. The open-source dataset provided scaled OpenSim models with calibrated markers. Using these models, we
performed inverse kinematics in OpenSim with the OMC data. For the dataset we collected, we created an
OpenSim model based on the base model from the open-source dataset. This model included a physiological
skeletal structure with 22 segments and 43 degrees of freedom. We calibrated the marker positions using a static
pose calibration. As with the open-source dataset, we ran OpenSim inverse kinematics to solve for the joint
angles.
For the baseline when evaluating our deep learning models, we used IMU-based inverse kinematics. We
followed the steps outlined in the original study that provided the dataset27. The calibration pose data included
in the open-source dataset was used to determine the relative orientation of the IMU to each body segment.
When solving the inverse kinematics, we utilized the setup weights provided in the dataset, which reduced the
influence of the IMUs on the shanks and feet by lowering the relative weights of those IMUs that were closer
to the ground. We did not perform IMU-based inverse kinematics for our collected dataset, as this dataset was
specifically gathered to evaluate the performance of the user-adaptive method on unseen data.
Results analysis
To evaluate the performance of the UI, UG, and UA, we segmented the ground truth and estimated joint
kinematics into gait cycles, defined by heel strike events. Based on a previous study on joint angles during
walking36, the hip flexion peak typically occurs at approximately 85% of the gait cycle. To align our analysis
with this benchmark, we performed peak detection on the sagittal hip angle data and then shifted it by 15%.
Additionally, during cornering, some participants walked through the turn while others stopped and rotated
in place. This variability, combined with the exclusion of corner sections, resulted in some gait cycles being
incomplete or partial, slightly altering the averaged gait pattern. However, as the primary focus of this study is
on estimation performance rather than the precise gait cycle representation, we included all gaits in the result
analysis. We used the last 20% of data from one specific participant, which is a data segment included in the test
data for all six models (three methods applied to two architectures), to analyze the estimation results.
To compare the estimation performances of the deep learning models, we calculated the root mean square
error (RMSE) between the joint angles estimated by the models and those calculated from OpenSim OMC-
based inverse kinematics. We also computed the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) because each
joint’s range of motion differs. This is important because the same RMSE value may indicate a larger error
percentageforajointwithasmallerrangeofmotioncomparedtoonewithalargerrange,leadingtoinconsistent
assessments of estimation accuracy. To calculate NRMSE, we divided the RMSE by the range of motion for each
joint. Additionally, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient for each gait cycle and joint. This was done
to examine how closely the patterns of the estimation results align with the ground truth throughout a gait
cycle. To further analyze the performance across different methods and architectures, we conducted a two-way
ANOVA test. For pairwise comparisons, we used the Bonferroni post-hoc correction with a significance level of
α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed using MATLAB R2023b.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 5 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 6 ---
Results
Overall model performance comparison
The UI outperformed IMU-based inverse kinematics in RMSE values, NRMSE values, and Pearson correlation
coefficientforbothLSTMandCNNmodels.Specifically,theLSTMmodelshowed49.20%loweraverageRMSE,
50.65% lower average NRMSE, and 20.13% higher correlation coefficient compared to IMU-based inverse
kinematics. The UI demonstrated the smallest standard deviation across joints. Compared to RMSE values of
IMU-based inverse kinematics, the UG showed higher error, with RMSE values 115.87% and 121.50% larger
for the LSTM and CNN models, respectively. It showed 117.60% and 112.83% larger NRMSE values, along with
33.33% and 42.84% lower Pearson correlation coefficients. We tested whether the performance degradation
of the UG could be overcome through transfer learning. The average RMSE and NRMSE for the UA LSTM
model were slightly lower than those of IMU-based inverse kinematics (0.4% and 7% respectively). The Pearson
correlation coefficient was 0.024% higher for the UA than for the IMU-based inverse kinematics. Although the
average RMSE and NRMSE values were similar between the UA and IMU-based inverse kinematics, the UA
shows substantially smaller standard deviation across joints in NRMSE and correlation coefficient compared
to those of IMU-based inverse kinematics(65.03% and 60.73% smaller, respectively). This highlights that the
UA enhances the consistency of model performance across different joints. Across all methods, the LSTM
model outperformed the CNN model. Figure 3 presents the average RMSE, NRMSE, and Pearson correlation
coefficient values for joint angles estimated by each method compared to OpenSim inverse kinematics, with
error bars representing standard deviations and statistical significance indicated.
Error for each joint
Figure 4-a presents the RMSE values for each joint and method. Figure 4-b presents the average sagittal hip,
knee, and ankle joint angles over gait cycles. The RMSE difference between the UI and the UG was large but
was not statistically significant. However, for the UA, sagittal knee and ankle angle estimation results showed a
statisticalsignificantreduction(p=0.0044andp=9.71×10−7
,respectively)inRMSEvaluescomparedtoresults
of the UG.
IMU combinations
In our analysis on various IMU combinations, we calculated the RMSE values for each combination, thereby
identifying the best combinations for each joint. We performed this procedure for all three methods(UI, UG,
and UA). Figure 5 shows results from the IMU combinations for sagittal hip, knee, and ankle joint angle. Across
all methods, IMU combinations including femur and calcaneus showed the lowest RMSE values for sagittal hip
and knee joint angle estimation. For the sagittal ankle angle estimation, IMU combinations that included the
tibia also demonstrated strong performance, with average RMSE values of 2.69◦
for the UI, 8.05◦
for the UG,
and 7.12◦
for the UA This indicates that IMUs on the hip and feet provide the most information for estimating
lower-limbjointkinematicsduringgait.IMUsontheshankalsoprovideusefuldata,whereasIMUsonthepelvis
do not yield beneficial information under the study conditions.
Transfer learning using our IMU data
We evaluated the performance of our UA by applying it to both the open-source dataset and the collected
dataset. We compared the results from train/validation/test ratio of 20/20/60 because it was the best split ratio
forUAwhenappliedtotheopen-sourcedataset.Fortheopen-sourcedataset,wefoundanRMSEof6.38±1.47◦
and for the collected dataset, 7.91 ± 2.07◦
. Applying transfer learning with the collected dataset substantially
improved the model’s estimation accuracy, bringing it to a level comparable to that achieved with the open-
source dataset. This indicates that the UA is effective not only for the original open-source dataset, but also for
the newly collected dataset. Figure 6 presents the RMSE and NRMSE values of each joint angle for each dataset.
Figure 7 presents the comparison of joint angle estimation errors for UG and UA along with estimated joint
angle results.
Fig. 3. (a) Average RMSE values for joint angles estimated by each method compared to OpenSim inverse
kinematics of the OMC data. (b) Average NRMSE values for joint angles estimated by each method compared
to OpenSim inverse kinematics of the OMC data. (c) Average Pearson correlation coefficients for joint angles
estimated by each method compared to OpenSim inverse kinematics of the OMC data. Error bars represent ± 1
standard deviation. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p < 0.05).
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 6 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 7 ---
Discussion
We presented benchmarks for deep learning models designed to estimate lower-limb joint kinematics, using
an open-source IMU dataset. Three different methods were implemented: UI, UG, and UA. These methods
were applied to two different deep learning architectures, CNN and LSTM networks. Our results demonstrated
that applying transfer learning to a generalized pre-trained model improves estimation performance by 53.86%,
Fig. 5. RMSE values for different IMU combinations. Darker colors in each column indicate higher RMSE
values.
Fig. 4. (a) Average RMSE values over gaits for joint angles estimated by LSTM models and IMU-based inverse
kinematics compared to OpenSim inverse kinematics of the OMC data. Error bars represent ± 1 standard
deviation. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p < 0.05). (b) Average estimated sagittal joint angles for the
hip, knee, and ankle during the gait cycle, calculated using the LSTM architecture. IMU-IK is the IMU-based
inverse kinematics, and GT is the ground truth from mocap-based inverse kinematics. Gaits with durations
less than 70% or greater than 130% of the average gait time were excluded, resulting in 32 gaits used to generate
this graph. The bands represent the standard error of the mean.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 7 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 8 ---
achieving accuracy comparable to that of IMU-based inverse kinematics. Additionally, our comparative analysis
of IMU sensor placements revealed that positioning the sensors on the femur and calcaneus provides the most
accurate estimation of lower-limb kinematics during gait.
While estimation performances of UA were on par with previous studies17,26,27,37, there is still potential for
improvement through the integration of additional data. Joint kinematic estimation performance of models
developed by UI and UA showed RMSE values of 2.81 ± 0.75◦
and 5.52 ± 2.10◦
, respectively, which falls in the
range of previous studies which reported RMSE values under 5◦17,26,27,37. However, models developed using UG
showed higher errors, with RMSE values exceeding 10◦
. The UG model’s ability to generalize is constrained by
the size and diversity of its training dataset, requiring a larger and more diverse dataset to fully perform. Given
these limitations, UG is insufficient for generalizing to new users, making the application of transfer learning
with a small amount of target user data(UA) highly valuable. Since UG served as the base model for the UA,
performance improvements of the UG model could also enhance performance of the UA model38. As model
generalizability typically improves with larger training datasets, we expect that incorporating additional data
into the UG training process will enhance its performance39–41. One way to achieve this is by including other
open-source datasets42 and processing them based on the guidelines provided in our paper. Another approachis
to generate synthetic IMU data to further increase the available data pool39.
The UA enhanced the performance of joint kinematic estimation for participants whose data were not
used for training. This demonstrated its potential for effective model personalization. In previous research,
transfer learning showed an improvement in estimation accuracy of approximately 10 to 15◦
for joint kinematic
estimation of unseen activities18. While the prior study focused on unseen activities, our work applied transfer
learning to unseen users. Despite this difference, we observed similar performance improvements, further
confirming that transfer learning is effective for joint kinematic estimation in various contexts. Moreover, the
enhanced estimation accuracy of the UA applied to both the open-source and the collected datasets suggests
that transfer learning is effective not only for the unseen participants within the same dataset, but also for those
from newly collected datasets using a different IMU set18. This demonstrated that a personalized joint kinematic
estimation model can be constructed by developing a generalized pre-trained model using open-source datasets
from prior studies and applying transfer learning with a small portion of a novel individual’s data. Because only
aminimalamountofnewdataisnecessary,thisapproachsignificantlyreducedboththetimeandcostassociated
with data collection and model training43,44.
We further showed the best IMU placements for estimating lower-limb joint kinematics, allowing for
reduction in the number of IMUs needed. Consistent with previous study, our findings confirm that femur and
calcaneus are the most critical IMU placements, whereas the pelvis is the least important14. However, among the
combinationsoftwoIMUs,thecombinationofpelvisandtibiashowedbetteraccuracycomparedtocombinations
of the pelvis with either the calcaneus or the femur. This suggests that the synergy between IMUs has a more
effect on estimation accuracy than relying solely on the precision of individual IMUs. This result differs from the
previous study14, where feet and thigh IMU combinations provided the best accuracy during their inter-subject
examination. In contrast, our findings highlight that combinations including the tibia offered the lowest RMSE
valuesforgeneralizedmodels.Thiscanalsobeseeninthebestcombinationsforspecificjoints.Forsagittalankle
estimation, combinations including the tibia and calcaneus provided the highest accuracy, while for sagittal
knee joint estimation, the femur and tibia or calcaneus combinations showed the best results. These findings
Fig. 6. Comparison of joint angle estimation errors for each dataset. (a) RMSE values for each joint angle. (b)
NRMSE values for each joint angle. Error bars represent ± 1 standard deviation.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 8 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 9 ---
emphasize that IMUs positioned near joints or able to capture the full range of motion are the most effective,
reinforcing that optimal IMU synergy is key to improving estimation accuracy. By determining these best IMU
combinations, we can offer reference for reducing the number of IMUs required for joint kinematic estimations.
This reduction considerably lowers the computational load for deep learning models, enhancing the feasibility
of real-time application by allowing faster processing and reduced latency43,44.
The results for UA applied with different train/test split ratio shows the possibility of optimal amount of
training data for transfer learning. Previous studies typically used 20 to 25% of the target data for transfer
learning18,45,46. Results from the UA applied to the open-source dataset confirm these findings, showing that
model accuracy does not considerably improve once the transfer rate exceeds 20%. However, when applied to
the collected dataset, the UA achieved maximum accuracy when the transfer rate exceeded 35%. One possible
explanation for this discrepancy is that the model in our collected dataset-based UA transferred data from a
new dataset, rather than from within the same dataset. Although we maintained fundamental aspects of the
data collection protocol, such as IMU placements and tasks performed, variations in sensor modules and
environmental conditions may have necessitated additional data for effective model adaptation through transfer
learning.
Several limitations in this study should be addressed in future work. One key limitation is that the UA
was tested on only a few participants. While this provided an initial proof of concept, further testing across a
broader range of datasets is necessary to gain a more comprehensive understanding of its performance. Gait
patterns can vary considerably between individuals, especially in different contexts such as age, gender, or
health status. Testing the model on diverse datasets that reflect a wide range of gait types, including those of
participants with abnormal walking patterns or varying speeds, will help determine how effectively the UA
generalizes across different population groups. Moreover, evaluating the estimation performance for clinical
populations with distinct walking patterns, such as those with gait impairments or using assistive devices,
Fig. 7. Comparison of joint angle estimation errors for UG and UA. (a) RMSE values for each joint angle. (b)
NRMSE values for each joint angle. Error bars represent ± 1 standard deviation. Asterisks indicate statistical
significance (p < 0.05). (c) Average estimated joint angles during the gait cycle for each method. GT is the
ground truth from mocap-based inverse kinematics. Gaits with durations less than 70% or greater than 130%
of the average gait time were excluded, resulting in 119 gaits to generate this graph. The bands represent the
standard error of the mean.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 9 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 10 ---
could provide valuable insights into its clinical applicability. Identifying how these differences influence the
accuracy of the UA model is critical for refining its performance for clinical settings. Additionally, expanding
the dataset types to include various environments, such as indoor versus outdoor walking or different types
of terrains, would be valuable in understanding the adaptability of the model in real-world scenarios. Such
diversity is essential to better evaluate the optimal transfer rate for different types of gaits and ensure the model’s
robustness in handling a wide array of motion data. Another limitation is the training of the base model, which
relied on a limited set of participants. The pre-trained base model used in this study, referred to as the UG, was
developedwithdatafromarelativelysmallgroupofindividuals,resultinginlowerestimationaccuracy.Transfer
learning models are highly influenced by the quality and diversity of the data used in pre-training, as it sets the
foundation for how well the model adapts to new data47. Expanding the base model with more diverse training
data is crucial for improving the accuracy of the UA. Incorporating a larger pool of participants representing
different demographics, such as age groups, physical conditions, or movement styles, will enable the base model
to capture a broader spectrum of gait variations Additionally, including data from various types of walking
activities (e.g., brisk walking, slow walking, walking with assistive devices) in the base model can help ensure
the transfer learning process is more effective when applied to target datasets with different characteristics. This
approach would likely lead to higher overall accuracy and better generalizability when adapting the model to
new datasets in future studies. Furthermore, although our method is readily applicable when open-source data
includes both IMU and OMC, it faces a limitation if a dataset only provides IMU data, since validation would
require OMC. Additionally, the UA requires a small amount of marker-based OMC data for transfer learning,
indicating that continued dependence on OMC systems remains a limitation. To address this limitation, future
research could consider using alternative methods of extracting kinematic data, such as OpenCap48 which can
utilize smartphone cameras, to reduce or eliminate the need for traditional OMC systems. This strategy would
not only broaden accessibility but also enhance the practicality of the system in various real-world scenarios.
This work provides guidelines for utilizing transfer learning with LSTM and CNN models for lower-limb
joint kinematic estimation, offering a practical solution for adapting models to individual users and varied
conditions. This method substantially enhances the applicability of open-source IMU datasets for personalized
gait analysis, fostering opportunities for broader adoption in both clinical and commercial settings.
Data availability
The datasets and codes that support the findings of this study are available on our GitHub repository at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​​/​​
/​g​i​t​h​u​​b​.​c​o​​m​/​m​i​n​t​​l​a​b​k​o​​r​​e​a​/​L​e​​a​r​n​i​​n​​g​-​B​a​​s​​e​d​-​L​o​​​w​e​r​-​​L​i​​m​b​-​J​​o​​i​n​t​-​K​i​​n​e​​m​a​t​​i​c​-​E​s​t​​i​m​​a​t​i​​o​n​​-​U​s​​i​n​​g​-​O​p​e​n​​-​S​o​u​​r​c​e​-​I​M​
U​-​D​a​t​a.
Received: 24 September 2024;Accepted: 7 February 2025
References
1. Nuckols, R. W., et al. Design and evaluation of an independent 4-week, exosuit-assisted, post-stroke community walking program.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 2023.
2. Revi, D. A. et al. Indirect measurement of anterior-posterior ground reaction forces using a minimal set of wearable inertial
sensors: From healthy to hemiparetic walking. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation. 17(1), 1–13 (2020).
3. McManus, K. et al. Development of data-driven metrics for balance impairment and fall risk assessment in older adults. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering. 69(7), 2324–2332 (2022).
4. Liu, J., Zhang, X. & Lockhart, T. E. Fall risk assessments based on postural and dynamic stability using inertial measurement unit.
Safety and Health at Work. 3(3), 192–198 (2012).
5. Subramaniam, S., Faisal, A. I. & Deen, M. J. Wearable sensor systems for fall risk assessment: A review. Frontiers in Digital Health.
4, 921506 (2022).
6. Topham, L. K. et al. Gait identification using limb joint movement and deep machine learning. IEEE Access. 10, 100113–100127
(2022).
7. Sabo, A. et al. Estimating parkinsonism severity in natural gait videos of older adults with dementia. IEEE journal of biomedical
and health informatics. 26(5), 2288–2298 (2022).
8. Kang, I., Kunapuli, P. & Young, A. J. Real-time neural network-based gait phase estimation using a robotic hip exoskeleton. IEEE
Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics 2(1), 28–37 (2019).
9. Kang, I., Hsu, H. & Young, A. The effect of hip assistance levels on human energetic cost using robotic hip exoskeletons. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters. 4(2), 430–437 (2019).
10. Kang, I. et al. Real-time gait phase estimation for robotic hip exoskeleton control during multimodal locomotion. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters. 6(2), 3491–3497 (2021).
11. O’Reilly, M. et al. Wearable inertial sensor systems for lower limb exercise detection and evaluation: A systematic review. Sports
Medicine. 48, 1221–1246 (2018).
12. Picerno, P. 25 years of lower limb joint kinematics by using inertial and magnetic sensors: A review of methodological approaches.
Gait & Posture. 51, 239–246 (2017).
13. Hafer,J.F.,etal.Challengesandadvancesintheuseofwearablesensorsforlowerextremitybiomechanics.JournalofBiomechanics,
2023.
14. Moghadam, S. M., Yeung, T., and Choisne, J. The Effect of IMU Sensor Location, Number of Features, and Window Size on a
Random Forest Model’s Accuracy in Predicting Joint Kinematics and Kinetics During Gait. IEEE Sensors Journal, 2023.
15. Chen, H., et al. Improving inertial sensor by reducing errors using deep learning methodology. NAECON 2018-IEEE National
Aerospace and Electronics Conference, IEEE, 2018.
16. Brossard, M., Bonnabel, S. & Barrau, A. Denoising IMU gyroscopes with deep learning for open-loop attitude estimation. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters. 5(3), 4796–4803 (2020).
17. Rapp, E. et al. Estimation of kinematics from inertial measurement units using a combined deep learning and optimization
framework. Journal of Biomechanics. 116, 110229 (2021).
18. Li, J., et al. 3D knee and hip angle estimation with reduced wearable IMUs via transfer learning during yoga, golf, swimming,
badminton, and dance. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 2024.
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 10 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 11 ---
19. Hernandez,V.etal.Lowerbodykinematicsestimationfromwearablesensorsforwalkingandrunning:Adeeplearningapproach.
Gait & Posture. 83, 185–193 (2021).
20. Bansal, A., Sharma, R. & Kathuria, M. A systematic review on data scarcity problem in deep learning: solution and applications.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 54(10s), 1–29 (2022).
21. Lee, C. J. & Lee, J. K. Inertial motion capture-based wearable systems for estimation of joint kinetics: A systematic review. Sensors.
22(7), 2507 (2022).
22. Weygers,I.etal.Inertialsensor-basedlowerlimbjointkinematics:Amethodologicalsystematicreview.Sensors.20(3),673(2020).
23. Tsipras, D., et al. From ImageNet to image classification: Contextualizing progress on benchmarks. International Conference on
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020.
24. Lin, T. Y., et al. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. Computer Vision-ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich,
Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13, Springer International Publishing, 2014.
25. Wang, A., et al. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
26. Moghadam, S. M., Yeung, T. & Choisne, J. A comparison of machine learning models’ accuracy in predicting lower-limb joints’
kinematics, kinetics, and muscle forces from wearable sensors. Scientific Reports 13(1), 5046 (2023).
27. Al Borno, M. et al. OpenSense: An open-source toolbox for inertial-measurement-unit-based measurement of lower extremity
kinematics over long durations. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation. 19(1), 1–11 (2022).
28. Dimitrov, H., Bull, A. M. & Farina, D. High-density EMG, IMU, kinetic, and kinematic open-source data for comprehensive
locomotion activities. Scientific Data. 10(1), 789 (2023).
29. Lavikainen, J. et al. Open-source software library for real-time inertial measurement unit data-based inverse kinematics using
OpenSim. PeerJ. 11, e15097 (2023).
30. Camargo, J. et al. A comprehensive, open-source dataset of lower limb biomechanics in multiple conditions of stairs, ramps, and
level-ground ambulation and transitions. Journal of Biomechanics. 119, 110320 (2021).
31. Topham, L. K. et al. A diverse and multi-modal gait dataset of indoor and outdoor walks acquired using multiple cameras and
sensors. Scientific Data. 10(1), 320 (2023).
32. Scivoletto, G. et al. Validity and reliability of the 10-m walk test and the 6-min walk test in spinal cord injury patients. Spinal cord.
49(6), 736–740 (2011).
33. Robert-Lachaine, X. et al. Accuracy and repeatability of single-pose calibration of inertial measurement units for whole-body
motion analysis. Gait & Posture. 54, 80–86 (2017).
34. Alzubaidi, L. et al. Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN architectures, challenges, applications, future directions. Journal of Big
Data 8, 1–74 (2021).
35. Graves, A. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.
36. Williams, Gavin, et al. The effect of walking speed on lower limb angular velocity. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
, 99(10), e12-e13 (2018).
37. Gholami, M. et al. Lower body kinematics monitoring in running using fabric-based wearable sensors and deep convolutional
neural networks. Sensors 19(23), 5325 (2019).
38. Entezari, R., et al. The role of pre-training data in transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13602, 2023.
39. Sharifi Renani, M. et al. The use of synthetic IMU signals in the training of deep learning models significantly improves the
accuracy of joint kinematic predictions. Sensors 21(17), 5876 (2021).
40. Hestness, J., et al. Deep learning scaling is predictable, empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
41. Sun, C., et al. Revisiting unreasonable effectiveness of data in deep learning era. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2017.
42. Scherpereel, K. et al. A human lower-limb biomechanics and wearable sensors dataset during cyclic and non-cyclic activities.
Scientific Data. 10(1), 924 (2023).
43. Justus, D. et al. Predicting the computational cost of deep learning models. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), IEEE, 2018.
44. Bai,L.etal.Dnnabacus:Towardaccuratecomputationalcostpredictionfordeepneuralnetworks.arXivpreprintarXiv:2205.12095,
2022.
45. Ameri, A. et al. A deep transfer learning approach to reducing the effect of electrode shift in EMG pattern recognition-based
control. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 28(2), 370–379 (2019).
46. Kang, P. et al. Wrist-worn hand gesture recognition while walking via transfer learning. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics 26(3), 952–961 (2021).
47. Pan, S. J. & Yang, Q. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 22(10), 1345–1359
(2009).
48. Uhlrich, S. D. et al. OpenCap: Human movement dynamics from smartphone videos. PLoS computational biology. 19.10, 2023.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT) grant funded by the
Korea Government (Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, MOTIE) in 2024 through the International Joint
TechnologyDevelopmentProgramforIndustrialTechnologyInternationalCooperation(ProjectNo.R2417081,
Project Name: Development of a real-time integrated control SW platform for autonomous driving/collabora-
tive robots using generative AI).
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the conceptualization of the study. B.H. contributed to the development of data pro-
cessing algorithms and deep learning models. B.H and S.B. conducted the experiments. B.H, S.B, I.K, and D.K.
analyzed and interpreted the data. D.K. contributed to funding acquisition. All authors prepared and revised the
manuscript.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s​4​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​5​-​8​9​7​1​6​-​4​​​​​.​​
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 11 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 12 ---
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to I.K. or D.K.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​​​​​.​​
© The Author(s) 2025
Scientific Reports| (2025)15:5287 12 |https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89716-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- PAGE 13 ---
