
--- PAGE 1 ---
GAIT ANALYSIS USING IMU SENSOR
Trupti Gujarathi
Department of instrumentation and control
College of Engineering,Pune
Pune, India
gujarathitp17.instru@coep.ac.in
Kalyani Bhole
Department of instrumentation and control
College of Engineering,Pune
Pune, India
kab.instru@coep.ac.in
Abstract—Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) based systems
that employ gyroscopes has a growing interest in gait analysis. We
described the IMU-based gait analysis method that uses angles
obtained from an accelerometer and gyroscope sensor within
MPU6050 to identify phases of each gait cycle during walking.
The gait analysis algorithm is composed of Heel strike and Toe
off factors detection observed by means of detection of initial
contact(IC) and terminal contact(TC) so that gait parameters
are calculated from those gait details. Most of the present gait
phase detection strategies use multiple sensor modules connected
to every segment of lower body. We have used two MPU6050
sensors placed on a shank of both legs to collect gait signals.
For experimental purpose, each participant was asked to walk
for a distance of 40 meters for the straight corridor at a normal
speed. These gait signal data measured by using Arduino uno
micro-controller is then transmitted to an android app ‘Blueterm’
wirelessly via the HC-05 Bluetooth module. Collected data by
the app is stored as a text file in a device containing app. This
database is further processed to an algorithm that has been
developed using MATLAB to extract a period of events that
happened during walking such as stride time, stance time, step
time, cadence, etc. The results are useful in identifying the bio-
mechanical stability of patients post surgery. Basically, this paper
presents a wearable IMU sensor-based system and its associated
gait analysis algorithm to obtain quantitative measurements of
the individual’s gait parameters to monitor patient progress in
orthopedics and rehabilitation.
Index Terms—Gait cycle analysis, Inertial Measurement
Unit(IMU) sensor, Gyro-sensor MPU6050, Bluetooth module,
Gait parameters.
I. INTRODUCTION
Gait analysis is the systemic study of locomotion of human
being during walking [1]. Gait analysis plays an important
role in detecting abnormality in the human walking pattern
[2]. Changes in gait styles implies important information of a
person’s fitness that would be used for assessing or analysis
individuals with pathological situations that have an effect on
their ability to walk and the complete biomechanic system
[3]. Traditionally gait analysis carried by a human observer
but this was further augmented with video recording, wherein
the recording could be reviewed in slow movement to permit
more accurate assessment of the gait cycle. This technique of
qualitative analysis remains extensively used nowadays. How-
ever, this method is labour intensive, requires a exceptionally
skilled clinician and is not accurate as methods that quantify
motion analysis.
A more objective way of assessing gait is required. There
are a variety of wearable sensors including accelerometer,
gyroscope, magnetometer, foot pressure sensor, inclinometer,
and goniometer that are generally used to measure vari-
ous characteristics of human gait. IMU sensors have been
used in different gait analysis techniques such as monitoring
postoperative gait abnormalities, detection of falls, nature of
Parkinson gait, auto detection of daily activities of older adults
and human walking foot trajectory [4]. These sensors are
directly worn or attached directly or indirectly to different
body locations such as foot, wrist, chest, thigh, and shank,
& are attached using belts, clips or other accessories [4]. Gait
analysis system has many clinical applications which consists
of external prosthesis adjustment for amputees, or outcome
evaluation after knee and hip replacement. In elderly subjects,
it can also be proposed as a diagnostic tool for abnormal gait
analysis, as a predictor tool for fall risk estimation, or as a
monitoring tool to assess progress through rehabilitation. In
this paper, we’ve implemented and explored the functionality
of a system which is totally based on an IMU sensor, includes
use of two mpu6050 sensors. Those sensors are connected to
the shank of both the leg to sense the motion of the leg. The
raw data obtained from sensors is processed in microcontroller
and then sent wirelessly via Bluetooth HC-05 module to an
android app. Collected data is further processed for calculating
gait parameters by using a developed gait phase detection
algorithm in MATLAB. The gait phase detection algorithm
consists of detection of Heel strike i.e. initial contact(IC)
and toe-off i.e. terminal contact(TC) points to decompose a
gait cycle into stance and swing phase and acquire several
other spatiotemporal gait parameters. This paper is organized
as follows: In section II- Brief discussion about gait cycle,
various gait phases, gait parameters, gait analysis and it’s
importance. Section III consists of system design in which we
have described hardware and software required, experimental
set-up, proposed gait phase detection algorithm on gait signals
collected from IMU sensors mounted on the shank, section IV
described results obtained from developed algorithm has been
explained. Section V and VI consist of conclusion and future
scope respectively.
II. THEORY
A. Normal Gait
Definition- A Series of rhythmical, alternating movements
of the lower extremities which results in the forward progres-
IEEE - 45670
10th ICCCNT 2019
July 6-8, 2019 , IIT - Kanpur,
Kanpur, India
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on March 31,2026 at 15:06:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 2 ---
sion of the body.
A gait cycle starts when heel strike i.e when heel contacts the
ground and end at the next heel strike of the same leg. Single
gait cycle is called as a stride.
A gait cycle or stride consists of two main phase: stance phase
& swing phase. In a single gait cycle stance phase comprises
of approximately 62% of the gait cycle, which begins when a
heel strike of one foot and ends with toe off of the same foot.
The foot is in weight bearing phase during this phase. The
average duration of the stance phase is approximately 0.59 to
0.67 seconds. The remaining 38% is the second phase which
is known as a swing phase. During this phase foot is in non-
weight bearing, as it moves from one step to another [5]. This
phase lasts, on average, 0.38 to 0.42 seconds. The reference
foot is in contact with the ground during stance while the
other foot is in swing, and swing is where the reference foot
is swinging over the ground while the other foot is in contact
with the ground as shown in Fig.1
1) Stance phase is further divided into:
• Heel contact:- ‘Initial contact’, the moment when heel of
the reference leg touches the ground while other leg is in
terminating stance phase.
• Foot flat:- ‘Loading response ’, the period when the
reference foot is in fully contact with the ground and
other leg is in initiating swing phase i.e. pre-swing.
• Midstance:- Body weight is completely falls on refernece
leg during mid-stance while other leg is initial swing and
mid-swing phases.
• Heel-off:- ‘Terminal stance’, it begins as soon as the heel
of the reference leg starts moving away from ground but
toe is still in contact with the ground and the other leg
follows the terminal swing.
• Toe-off:-‘Pre-swing’, when the reference foot start mov-
ing further keeping toe in contact with ground while the
other leg having loading response [6].
2) Swing phase:
• Acceleration:- ‘Initial swing’During acceleration forward
motion of the limb starts with knee flexion and foot looses
the contact with ground.
• Midswing:- Reference leg is in the air and thigh is at its
maximum flexion for advancement of limb.
• Deceleration:- ‘Terminal swing’, the shank is at the final
advancement and the reference foot is positioned for
initial foot contact to start the next gait cycle.
Fig.1 shows the eight sub phases of the human gait cycle.
B. Gait parameters
i. Stride time:- It is the time duration between heel strike
/toe-off to the next heel strike/toe-off of the same leg.
(1.09±0.06 sec = 1.15 sec).
ii. Stance time:- Time period during the foot is in contact
with the ground, i.e. time taken from the heel strike point
to the toe-off point within each gait cycle [9]. (0.8 ± 0.02
sec)
iii. Swing time:- While the foot completely off the ground,
that duration is known as swing time. (0.4 ± 0.05sec)
Fig. 1. Phases of gait cycle
iv. Step time:- Time interval between successive foot contact
with the floor of the opposite feet (0.8 sec)
v. Stride length:- Distance covered during successive heel
strike of the same foot. (Approximately = 130 cm ± 15
cm)
vi. Step length:- It is the linear distance in the plane of
progression between two successive points of foot floor
contact of the opposite feet. (Approximately = 60 cm ±
10 cm)
vii. Gait speed:- It is calculated by distance covered in a given
time. The instantaneous speed varies from one instant to
another during the walking cycle, but the average speed
is the product of the cadence and the stride length.
viii. Cadence:- The cadence is the number of steps taken per
minute, there are two steps in a single gait cycle, and the
cadence is a measure of half-cycles [7]. (100 ± 6 steps
/min)
Slow: 60-70 Steps / min
Medium: 80-90 Steps / min
Fast: 120 Steps / min
C. Gait analysis and it’s importance
Gait Analysis can be defined as the ‘study of the biome-
chanics of human locomotion to quantify the factors which
helps to check the functionality of the lower limb’. This is
fundamental for the detection of gait disorders. Gait analysis
can also be defined as the systemic study of human movements
during walking or running(locomotion) [3]. In a broader sense,
gait analysis includes assessment, planning and treating people
with conditions affecting their gait. So gait analysis allows
assessing the gait pattern of a person to identify different
walking disorders. For assessment and treatment of individual
having certain(pathological) conditions which affects their
walking ability and entire muscular-skeletal system accurate
gait analysis is most useful.
Importance of gait analysis:
• Gait cycle analysis is used in the study of human loco-
motion
• As reduced gait quality can lead to severe reductions in
patient mobility and quality of life, it is important to
quantify, detect and treat gait impairments as early as
possible [2]
IEEE - 45670
10th ICCCNT 2019
July 6-8, 2019 , IIT - Kanpur,
Kanpur, India
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on March 31,2026 at 15:06:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of designed system
• to identify the loss of the person’s ability to walk also it
can be helpful to implement and evaluate treatments to
correct abnormalities within an individual.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
In this section, we implement the proposed algorithm for
human gait phase detection. The overall system design of the
gait cycle analysis system can be categorized into two parts,
the hardware and software requirements.
A. Hardware Used
The system we have developed for gait analysis is composed
of two IMU sensor MPU6050, which consist of triaxial
accelerometer & triaxial gyroscope, a microcontroller (Ar-
duino uno), and a Bluetooth module HC-05. During walking
motion acceleration signals are generated, and detected by
the MPU6050 sensor. Then it will measure the angular rate
of the shank motion with respect to ground. The angle is
generated by combining gyroscope and accelerometer data
related through complementary filter [8]. The sensors on the
shank had a full scale range of accelerometer 2g with Sen-
sitivity Scale Factor of 16,384LSB(Count)/g & Gyroscope
full scale range of ±500/s with sensitivity scale factor of
65.5LSB(Count)/°/s. Furthermore, the digital signals gen-
erated by the MPU6050 sensor from both the shank through an
I2C interface is collected by an Arduino Uno. Also, a HC-05
Bluetooth module is connected to microcontroller for wireless
communication. The output signals of the accelerometer and
gyroscopes are all sampled at 400 kHz by a 12-bit analog
to digital converter(ADC). Simultaneously these data is sent
wirelessly to an android app ‘Blueterm’ via HC-05 Bluetooth
module. Obtained data was stored as a text file in the android
app. The power consumed by the wearable hardware device is
30 mA at 5 V. The schematic diagram of the designed system
is as shown in Fig.2.
B. Software used
Software that we used to implement the gait phase detection
algorithm is MATLAB. It is a high-level language and interac-
tive environment for numerical computation, visualization, and
programming. Gait signal data is imported in MATLAB and
by using all the required mathematical calculations, algorithm
to extract gait parameters has developed.
C. Experimental setup
Data was collected from a group of six people was selected
for gait analysis. They were asked to walk for 40 meters on
a straight line at a normal speed. During the walking trials,
two IMU sensors MPU6050 that measures the angular rate of
the rotations were attached on the anterior side of the lower
limbs: one on each shank. Velcro belts were used to fix the
sensors such that the sensor does not slip or move during
walking. The sensors were aligned to the mediolateral axis,
hence, measuring rotation in the sagittal plane. The sensors
on the shank had a full scale range of accelerometer ±2g
with Sensitivity Scale Factor of 16,384LSB(Count)/g &
Gyroscope full scale range of ±500/s with sensitivity scale
factor of 65.5LSB(Count)/°/s. Data was recorded with a
sampling rate of 400 khz. Simultaneously these data was sent
to an android app ‘Blueterm’ via HC-05 Bluetooth module.
Collected data was stored as a text file in the Blueterm
app. This file is imported in MATLAB and using proposed
algorithm gait parameters were extracted.
D. Proposed algorithm
The proposed gait phase detection algorithm is developed
to acquire the gait parameters from the angular rate signal
generated by the IMU sensors from walking motions of the
person. The following steps describes the proposed algorithm
in detail.
1) Data collection: In natural walking the hips, knee and
ankle are synchronized in a smooth bouncing vertical motion
with each step. This vertical motion is in the same direction
as gravitational force. Legs do majority of movement while
walking because the joints produce greater levels of motion
to transport the body ahead in horizontal direction [4]. This
rhythmic, repetitive movement involves steps and strides
known as the gait cycle. This movement produces angular
deflection, which is investigated in this study. An MPU6050
sensor consisting of an accelerometer and gyroscope is used
to collect measurement of the angular rate about x, y and
z-axes of the sensor frame due to horizontal movement. Data
are analyzed using our proposed algorithm to find strides,
stance and swing event information. The sample data from
the individual is as shown in Fig.3
2) Selection of sensitive axis: 3D data derived from the
gyro-sensor demonstrate different characteristic according to
the walking activities of the individual. Therefore it is of
great importance to select the most sensitive axis in the sense
that the corresponding data are closely correlated with the
activity and it is advisable to select the axis whose data has
the maximum magnitude. Y-axis(in sagittal plane direction)
of the angular rate signals are used to detect the HS and TO
points during walking movements for further calculating gait
parameters [9].
IEEE - 45670
10th ICCCNT 2019
July 6-8, 2019 , IIT - Kanpur,
Kanpur, India
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on March 31,2026 at 15:06:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
3) Heel strike and Toe off points detection: Using signals
from the shanks gait cycles and related events were detected
and spatiotemporal parameter estimated. In this first step was
to detect heel strike i.e. initial contact (IC) and Toe off i.e.
terminal contact (TC) of the foot with respect to ground. By
simultaneously recording the signals using the body attached
IMU MPU6050 sensors, the intervals where these events
occurred were determined based on the shank angle rate. The
heel strike of a gait cycle is characterized by a negative angle
reaching its highest values at stance phase initiation. After
this, the TC is characterized by a maximum positive angle.
With different populations of normal and pathologic, young
and elderly subjects, the angular rate can be different. By using
these precise instances of heel strike and Toe off, maximum
and minimum peaks of the signal are detected from the data
signal obtained by right and left shank.
Fig. 3. Shank angles obtained by sensors from Saggital plane
4) Calculation of Gait Parameters: Using the right foot
as a reference to apply the spatiotemporal gait parameter
measurement, we categorize the gait cycle into two phases,
i.e. stance phase and swing phase [10]. Heel strike denotes
the initiation of stance phase whereas the swing phase starts
at the toe off of the same foot [6]. Once the toe off and heel
strike points of each gait cycle are found, we can calculate the
following gait parameters. The gait parameters are computed
as follows [11]:
(i) Stride duration (time between HS of stride i and HS of
stride i+1)
Stride(i) = HS(i + 1) − HS(i); (1)
(ii) Stance duration (time between HS and TO during stride
i)
Stance(i) = TO(i) − HS(i); (2)
(iii) Swing duration:- time between TO of stride i and HS of
stride i+1
Swing(i) = HS(i + 1) − TO(i); (3)
(iv) Right step duration:- time between left HS (HSleft) of
stride i and of right HS (HSright) stride i+1
Rightstep(i) = HSright(i + 1) − HSleft(i); (4)
(v) Left step duration (time between HSright and HSleft
during stride i)
Leftstep(i) = HSleft(i) − HSright(i); (5)
TABLE I
GAIT CYCLE PARAMETERS OBTAINED FROM SUBJECTS
F M M F M M
Age(years) 24 26 28 29 24 26
Height(cm) 164 180 176 155 157 171
Stride time(sec) 1.23 1.21 1.16 1.12 1.11 1.20
Stance time(sec) 0.89 0.86 0.82 0.81 0.83 0.89
Swing time(sec) 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.31 0.28 0.31
Right step time(sec) 0.60 0.59 0.56 0.54 0.55 0.58
stride length(m) 1.02 1.11 1.08 1.13 0.93 1.05
step length(m) 0.51 0.55 0.54 0.56 0.46 0.52
Gait speed(m/s) 0.80 0.88 0.90 0.94 0.81 0.85
Cadence 98 101 105 109 107 102
,
(vi) Stride legth:- the distance covered from IC to IC of the
same foot
Average Stride length
= Totaldistance/TotalNo.ofstride (6)
(vii) Step length:- Distance covered during single step.
(viii) Cadence:- Total number of strides per minute.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we have exhibited the created system de-
pendent on IMU sensor and related algorithm to perform
gait analysis. Relevant gait events are calculated from the
gait data of 6 healthy volunteers. Measured gait parameters
values validated against the standard values of the same for
healthy adults. Our result value has matched with the standard
gait parameters values as mentioned in II-B. Fig.3 shows the
gait data obtained in terms of the angular rotation of the
IMU sensors attached on the shanks of the body. Using the
algorithm we obtained two different series of samples HS and
TO for data obtained from the attached sensor. From these
points and using appropriate calculation we have obtained
gait parameters like time duration of stride, stance, swing,
right step also stride length and step length. We have obtained
the total number of strides within a particular time, & from
this information we calculated the cadence of the individual.
Table I Shows the results obtained from the 6 healthy subjects
participated.
V. CONCLUSION
The results of the experiment demonstrate that the chosen
sensor is effective for the data acquisition & it improves
the accuracy for gait analysis. The IMU accelerometer and
gyroscope data had been analyzed using our developed system
which is used to extract gait parameters: stance time, stride
time, swing time, step time, stride length, step length, Cadence,
and gait speed. The focus of the research was to develop
low cost effective & simple technique by considering person
IEEE - 45670
10th ICCCNT 2019
July 6-8, 2019 , IIT - Kanpur,
Kanpur, India
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on March 31,2026 at 15:06:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
comfort to walk which can be used for gait analysis, and it is
possible through use of mountable sensors like gyrosensor.
At standard gait, there is a uniform repetitive flexion and
extension of joints present compared to a person with certain
deformity. The appropriate methodology of analysis can serve
as an appropriate rehabilitation process for a patient with gait
malfunction.
VI. FUTURE SCOPE
Our future work will aim to make wireless, fully automatic
real-time gait feature extraction system which can be used for
a long duration to continuous monitoring and to identify the
abnormal gait patterns for the assessment of elderly fall risk,
rehabilitation, athlete’s application. The next step would be to
validate this method on subjects with atypical gait and see if
there is enough sensitivity to detect gait abnormalities.
REFERENCES
[1] Whittle, M.W., 2007. Chap. 5 Application of gait analysis. In An
introduction to gait analysis (p. 177). Butterworth-Heinemann.
[2] Hannink, J., Kautz, T., Pasluosta, C.F., Gaßmann, K.G., Klucken, J. and
Eskofier, B.M., 2017. Sensor-based gait parameter extraction with deep
convolutional neural networks. IEEE journal of biomedical and health
informatics, 21(1), pp.85-93.
[3] Ahmadi, A., Destelle, F., Unzueta, L., Monaghan, D.S., Linaza, M.T.,
Moran, K. and O’Connor, N.E., 2016. 3D human gait reconstruction and
monitoring using body-worn inertial sensors and kinematic modeling.
IEEE Sensors Journal, 16(24), pp.8823-8831.
[4] Anwary, A.R., Yu, H. and Vassallo, M., 2018. Optimal foot location for
placing wearable IMU sensors and automatic feature extraction for gait
analysis. IEEE Sensors Journal, 18(6), pp.2555-2567.
[5] Friis, E., 2017. Mechanical Testing of Orthopaedic Implants. Woodhead
Publishing.
[6] Abhayasinghe, N. and Murray, I., 2014, April. Human gait phase
recognition based on thigh movement computed using IMUs. In 2014
IEEE Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor
Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
[7] Bhosale, T., Kudale, H., Kumthekar, V., Garude, S. and Dhumal, P.,
2015, October. Gait analysis using wearable sensors. In 2015 Interna-
tional Conference on Energy Systems and Applications (pp. 267-269).
IEEE.
[8] Mota, F.A.O., Biajo, V.H.M., Mota, H.O. and Vasconcelos, F.H., 2017,
May. A wireless sensor network for the biomechanical analysis of
the gait. In 2017 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference (I2MTC) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[9] Chang, H.C., Hsu, Y.L., Yang, S.C., Lin, J.C. and Wu, Z.H., 2016. A
wearable inertial measurement system with complementary filter for gait
analysis of patients with stroke or Parkinson’s disease. IEEE Access, 4,
pp.8442-8453.
[10] Truong, P., Lee, J., Kwon, A.R. and Jeong, G.M., 2016. Stride counting
in human walking and walking distance estimation using insole sensors.
Sensors, 16(6), p.823.
[11] Boutaayamou, M., Brüls, O., Denoël, V., Schwartz, C., Demonceau,
M., Garraux, G. and Verly, J.G., 2015, December. Segmentation of
gait cycles using foot-mounted 3D accelerometers. In 2015 International
Conference on 3D Imaging (IC3D) (pp. 1-7). IEEE.
[12] Hsu, Y.L., Chung, P.C., Wang, W.H., Pai, M.C., Wang, C.Y., Lin,
C.W., Wu, H.L. and Wang, J.S., 2014. Gait and balance analysis
for patients with Alzheimer’s disease using an inertial-sensor-based
wearable instrument. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics,
18(6), pp.1822-1830.
[13] Minami, A., Horikawa, T., Ohkubo, T., Kobayashi, K., Watanabe, K. and
Kurihara, Y., 2010, August. A study on gait analysis by measuring axis
rotation based on 3D magnetic and acceleration sensors. In Proceedings
of SICE Annual Conference 2010 (pp. 2518-2522). IEEE.
[14] Pappas, I.P., Popovic, M.R., Keller, T., Dietz, V. and Morari, M., 2001.
A reliable gait phase detection system. IEEE Transactions on neural
systems and rehabilitation engineering, 9(2), pp.113-125.
[15] Kharb, A., Saini, V., Jain, Y.K. and Dhiman, S., 2011. A review of gait
cycle and its parameters. IJCEM International Journal of Computational
Engineering & Management, 13, pp.78-83.
IEEE - 45670
10th ICCCNT 2019
July 6-8, 2019 , IIT - Kanpur,
Kanpur, India
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on March 31,2026 at 15:06:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
