
--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Kokkotis, C.; Chalatsis, G.;
Moustakidis, S.; Siouras, A.;
Mitrousias, V.; Tsaopoulos, D.;
Patikas, D.; Aggelousis, N.; Hantes,
M.; Giakas, G.; et al. Identifying
Gait-Related Functional Outcomes in
Post-Knee Surgery Patients Using
Machine Learning: A Systematic
Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 2023, 20, 448. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph20010448
Academic Editor: Paul B. Tchounwou
Received: 30 November 2022
Revised: 24 December 2022
Accepted: 26 December 2022
Published: 27 December 2022
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
International Journal of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Systematic Review
Identifying Gait-Related Functional Outcomes in Post-Knee
Surgery Patients Using Machine Learning: A Systematic Review
Christos Kokkotis 1, Georgios Chalatsis 2 , Serafeim Moustakidis 3 , Athanasios Siouras 3,4,
Vasileios Mitrousias 2 , Dimitrios Tsaopoulos 5 , Dimitrios Patikas 6 , Nikolaos Aggelousis 1 ,
Michael Hantes 2 , Giannis Giakas 7, Dimitrios Katsavelis 8 and Themistoklis Tsatalas 7,*
1 Department of Physical Education and Sport Science, Democritus University of Thrace,
69100 Komotini, Greece
2 Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 41500 Larissa, Greece
3 AIDEAS OÜ, 10117 Tallinn, Estonia
4 Department of Computer Science and Biomedical Informatics, School of Science, University of Thessaly,
35131 Lamia, Greece
5 Institute for Bio-Economy and Agri-Technology, Center for Research and Technology Hellas,
38333 Volos, Greece
6 School of Physical Education and Sports Science at Serres, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
62110 Serres, Greece
7 Department of Physical Education and Sport Science, University of Thessaly, 42100 Trikala, Greece
8 Department of Exercise Science and Pre-Health Profession, Creighton University, Omaha, NE 68178, USA
* Correspondence: ttsatalas@uth.gr
Abstract: Modern lifestyles require new tools for determining a person’s ability to return to daily
activities after knee surgery. These quantitative instruments must feature high discrimination, be non-
invasive, and be inexpensive. Machine learning is a revolutionary approach that has the potential to
satisfy the aforementioned requirements and bridge the knowledge gap. The scope of this study is to
summarize the results of a systematic literature review on the identification of gait-related changes
and the determination of the functional recovery status of patients after knee surgery using advanced
machine learning algorithms. The current systematic review was conducted using multiple databases
in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines, including Scopus, PubMed, and Semantic Scholar. Six out
of the 405 articles met our inclusion criteria and were directly related to the quantification of the
recovery status using machine learning and gait data. The results were interpreted using appropriate
metrics. The results demonstrated a recent increase in the use of sophisticated machine learning
techniques that can provide robust decision-making support during personalized post-treatment
interventions for knee-surgery patients.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; knee surgery; post-operative; walking; biomechanical data
1. Introduction
The human knee is the largest and most complex joint in the body. Its two articulations
allow for greater flexibility but also make it more vulnerable to injuries. The knee is the most
frequentlyinjuredjointinthehumanbody, especiallyamongyoungsportsparticipants[1,2].
Most knee injuries can be treated conservatively, but surgical intervention may be necessary
in some cases. These knee injuries can involve the ligaments, cartilage, tendons, or bones.
In the United States, many studies on knee injuries among athletes have been conducted in
collegiate settings. For example, an epidemiological study of volleyball male and female
athletes in the National Collegiate Athletic Association found that the knee was the most
commonly injured body part (16.3% in females; 25.5% in males), with different injury
patterns for each sex [3]. In addition, knee joint degeneration and osteoarthritis (OA) are
the most prevalent forms of disability, affecting millions of individuals worldwide [4].
When conservative treatment fails, preservation procedures such as knee osteotomies or
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20010448 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

--- PAGE 2 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 2 of 12
joint replacement procedures (such as unicondylar and total knee arthroplasty, TKA) are
the treatment of choice. TKA is the most common surgical procedure for people with
end-stage OA, providing substantial improvement in quality of life [5].
Previousstudieshaveshownthatnotallpatientshavethesamerateofsatisfactionafter
surgery and rehabilitation [6–8]. Approximately 11–20% of patients experience discomfort
following TKA, which is related to persisting functional impairments [6]. The results do
not seem to be enhanced by the adoption of more recent implant designs [7]. Alongside, the
results after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR) can be poor, with an increased
risk of ACL re-rupture and earlier onset of OA compared with healthy individuals [8].
These outcomes may be due to poor surgical outcomes, rehabilitation inadequacy, or
treatment failure to restore healthy lower limb biomechanics, resulting in altered joint
movement patterns, such as reduction in peak knee flexion angles during walking one year
post-operation [9].
To aid clinical assessment, the identification of the post-operative rehabilitation status
is important. Until now, performance and patient-based measures have been the usual
methodologies regarding the evaluation of the recovery progress following knee surgery.
Patient-reported outcome measures (PROM) are usually telephone interviews, mail-in
questionnaires, or tools to analyze the health-related status of individuals that undergo
knee surgery. Questionnaires, such as the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score
(KOOS) [10], International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) [11], Tegner-Lysholm
knee scoring scale [12], and Tegner Activity Scale [13], have been extensively used in
the literature. However, these measures rely on subjective statements presented by the
patients or the primary caregivers and can be biased due to the recall of events or the raters’
subjective comments on patient performance. On the other hand, performance-based
measures have been used for assessing mobility, range of motion, timing, and total elapsed
time. Popular tests include the six-minute walk test (6MWT), stair climb test (SCT), chair
stand test (CST), and timed up and go test (TUG) [14]. However, these tests are rated
manually by another individual and may suffer from issues of subjectiveness and rater
biases. Quantitative movement analysis has been suggested as an objective follow-up of
biomechanical improvement and an additional factor for a more precise rehabilitation [15].
Conventional lab-based methods are time-consuming and require expensive equipment
and specialized personnel.
Thus, early and accurate evaluation of patients’ functional outcomes post-surgery
would be essential for directing resources toward an effective and objective assessment.
Machine learning (ML) is a data analysis approach that produces algorithms to predict
outcomes and repeatedly “train” them from new data. It is increasingly emphasized in
orthopedics [16] as a competitive alternative to regression analysis, capturing nonlineari-
ties and complex interactions among multiple predictor variables [17]. Utilizing machine
learning techniques to analyze specific kinematic and kinetic parameters permits a quick
evaluation of the rehabilitation stage [18]. Additionally, the growing use of lightweight,
inexpensive, and mobile wearable sensors (specifically inertial measurement units, IMUs)
to extract meaningful movement characteristics can provide further useful information for
clinical evaluation [19]. Deep learning algorithms have been used on IMU-based movement
data to categorize and quantify activity-specific motions [20].
The aim of this review is to identify studies that have utilized machine learning (ML)
or deep learning techniques to evaluate the rehabilitation stage of the knee joint following
major orthopedic surgery using biomechanical data from gait analysis. Gait analysis was
chosen as the focus of this review because it is a common task in daily activity, is easily
performed, and is closely linked to clinical assessment of knee injuries. ML and deep
learning techniques have the potential to significantly improve the accuracy and efficiency
of gait analysis, making them valuable tools for monitoring and assessing the rehabilitation
process following knee surgery. By identifying and reviewing relevant studies, this review
aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the current state of the field and highlight

--- PAGE 3 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 3 of 12
the potential benefits and limitations of using these techniques in the evaluation of knee
surgery rehabilitation.
Machine Learning in a Nutshell
This section summarizes the important terminology with respect to ML models that
were used in the research articles that were part of the present review. The purpose of
this is to assist the readers’ knowledge and to ensure that everything is covered. ML is
a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) that deals with the creation of algorithms that can
autonomously learn to generate accurate predictions by relying on their past experiences
as opposed to pre-programmed instructions (Table 1).
Table 1. A brief summary of the ML models presented in the papers in our survey.
Models Description
Logistic Regression (LR)
LR is a supervised algorithm for predicting a binary outcome, such as yes or no, using prior
observations of a dataset. Examining the relationship between one or more independent
factors and a dependent variable, a logistic regression model predicts the
dependent variable.
Neural Network (NN)
A neural network is a group of algorithms that attempts to identify underlying links in a set
of data by mimicking the way the human brain works. The three basic components are the
input layer, the processing layer, and the output layer. According to a variety of parameters,
the inputs might be weighted. The processing layer has nodes and connections between
these nodes that are supposed to be equivalent to neurons and synapses in an animal brain.
XGBoost
XGBoost belongs to the category of the gradient boosted tree algorithms. Gradient boosting
predicts a target (dependent) variable by combining the estimates of several simpler, less
accurate (weak) models.
Random Forest (RF)
RFs are used to tackle regression and classification problems in machine learning.
It employs ensemble learning, that combines multiple classifiers in order to solve complex
problems. RFs typically contain a number of different decision trees. The “forest” of the
random forest can be trained via bagging or bootstrap aggregation. Bagging enhances
machine learning accuracy with an ensemble meta-algorithm.
Decision Trees (DTs)
DTs belong to the supervised learning category and can be used for regression and
classification tasks. The objective is to create a model capable of predicting the target
variable accurately using a rule-based mechanism learned from the available data features.
A tree can be viewed as an approximation that is piecewise constant.
Naïve Bayes
The Naïve Bayes algorithm is a category of supervised learning classifiers that are based on
Bayes’ theorem. These classifiers use the “naïve” assumption that each pair of features is
independent of one another regardless of the value of the class variable.
Support vector machine (SVM)
SVM aims to find such hyperplane that separates the data into two classes most effectively.
There are numerous potential hyperplanes that might be selected to split the two data point
samples. The main task of the SVM algorithm is to identify the hyperplane that maximizes
the margin between the two classes, or the greatest distance between data points of different
classes.
K-nearest neighbors (KNN)
The KNN algorithm is a supervised ML algorithm that may be applied to both regression
and classification tasks. It works by (i) figuring out the distance between a testing sample
and each data sample and (ii) picking the most common label as the predicted target in a
classification task or combining the labels to obtain the output in a regression task.
Hierarchical cluster analysis
Hierarchical clustering, also known as hierarchical cluster analysis, is a technique that
clusters related objects. The endpoint consists of a collection of clusters, where each cluster
is distinct from the others and the items within each cluster are generally comparable.
Objects are then combined in pairs based on the distance between them. The process
continues with the next round of combining clusters. This process is repeated until there is
only one cluster.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Reporting
The criteria for recommended documentation items for systematic reviews and meta-
analyses served as the basis for the conduct of this systematic review, which was carried
out in accordance with PRISMA guidelines [21] (the current systematic review was not

--- PAGE 4 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 4 of 12
registered). Two authors (C.K., A.S.) independently completed the review procedure
(literature search, selection of papers, and extraction of data). A third author addressed
discrepancies (S.M.).
2.2. Literature Search
The following databases were searched systematically: (a) MEDLINE (through PubMed),
(b) Scopus, and (c) Semantic Scholar. In addition, a manual search was also conducted on
Google Scholar to identify articles cited by the collected papers quoting the retrieved papers.
Abstracts not published in English, conference abstracts, and the OpenGrey database were
evaluated as grey literature. Initial determinations of the papers’ eligibility were based
on their titles and abstracts. Then, the entire texts of the first qualifiers were examined to
determine if they met the inclusion criteria. Table 2 lists the structured search technique for
each database.
Table 2. Employed databases and search strategies.
Database Search Strategy
PubMed
(“anterior cruciate ligament” OR “Total knee arthroplasty” OR “total knee replacement” OR
Meniscectomy OR “Meniscal suturing” OR “unicompartment knee arthroplasty” OR “Anterolateral
ligament reconstruction” OR “Anterolateral ligament repair” OR “Posterolateral corner
reconstruction” OR “Posterior cruciate ligament” OR “High tibia osteotomy”) AND (walking OR
gait) AND (“machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “Artificial intelligence”) NOT images
Scopus
(“anterior cruciate ligament” OR “Total knee arthroplasty” OR “total knee replacement” OR
“Meniscectomy” OR “Meniscal suturing” OR “unicompartment knee arthroplasty” OR “Anterolateral
ligament reconstruction” OR “Anterolateral ligament repair” OR “Posterolateral corner
reconstruction” OR “Posterior cruciate ligament” OR “High tibia osteotomy”) AND (walking OR
gait) AND (“machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “Artificial intelligence”) AND NOT (images)
Semantic Scholar
“anterior cruciate ligament” OR “Total knee arthroplasty” OR “total knee replacement” OR
“Meniscectomy” OR “Meniscal suturing” OR “unicompartment knee arthroplasty” OR “Anterolateral
ligament reconstruction” OR “Anterolateral ligament repair” OR “Posterolateral corner
reconstruction” OR “Posterior cruciate ligament” OR “High tibia osteotomy” AND walking OR gait
AND “machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “Artificial intelligence” AND NOT images”
2.3. Eligibility Criteria
In this study, the population consisted of patients who had undergone knee surgery.
The intervention was the surgery itself. There were no comparators, as the focus of the
study was on the effects of the surgery. The outcomes of interest were whether the patient
was healthy, had undergone total knee arthroplasty (TKA), or had an anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) injury. The study setting criteria were designed to diagnose the patients
and assess the effectiveness of the surgery in improving their overall health and mobility.
The following criteria were employed for inclusion:
1. Articles which are employing ML techniques;
2. Studies that refer to knee injuries (e.g., anterior cruciate ligament, TKA, total knee
replacement, meniscectomy, meniscal suturing, unicompartment knee arthroplasty,
anterolateral ligament reconstruction, anterolateral ligament repair, posterolateral
corner reconstruction, posterior cruciate ligament and high tibia osteotomy);
3. Studies that are based on gait-related biomechanical data.
The following criteria were used to exclude contributions: (i) articles published prior to
2015; (ii) studies without human subjects, studies which employed only statistical analysis;
(iii) studies that examine movements unrelated to gait (e.g., countermovement jump); (iv)
studies with only pre-surgery measurements with aim to predict the post-surgery recovery
status; (v) studies without biomechanical data; (vi) articles not written in English; and (vii)
editorials, commentaries, and book chapters.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 5 of 12
2.4. Data Extraction
A modified Microsoft Excel document was used for the retrieved data. The category,
author name, publication year, specification of the task, type of data, subjects, outcome as-
sessment, feature engineering, machine learning algorithms, validation method, and results
were provided for each of the retrieved paper. The list of the authors was also included.
2.5. Statistical Analysis
In this review study, accuracy was the most assessed evaluative metric in determining
the predictive capabilities of the proposed learning algorithms.
2.6. Quality Assessment
The quality of non-randomized studies was evaluated using a modified methodologic
index (MINORS) [22,23]. The following information was considered on a six-item checklist:
performance metrics, dataset distribution, ground truth label determination, the feature
set that was used as inputs, disclosure, and the aim of the study. Data were extracted and
recorded using standardized forms.
The two observers worked to address differences in article selection, quality assess-
ment, and data extraction (A.S., C.K.) and organized a meeting of consensus. The items
were assigned a score of 0 (not reported), 1 (reported but inadequate), or 2 (reported but
adequate). The mean modified MINORS score was 9.33 ± 1.75 across all investigations.
It is important to note that the score range per item was in the range of (0,12).
As depicted in Figure 1, each of the six published studies explicitly described the
study’s objective, input characteristics, and the dataset obtained using suitable metrics.
In five investigations (83.33%), a clear description and distribution of the performance
were given. One study (16.66%) precisely stated how the ground truth (AI’s reference
standards) was established, whereas two utilized AI models that were improperly trained.
Insufficient descriptions of ground truth assignments were the leading cause of quality
point reductions. Finally, 50% of the employed studies failed to disclose a declaration of
conflict of interest.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 13
adequate). The mean modified MINORS score was 9.33 ± 1.75 across all investigations. It
is important to note that the score range per item was in the range of (0,12).
As depicted in Figure 1, each of the six published studies explicitly described the
study’s objective, input characteristics, and the dataset obtained using suitable metrics. In
five investigations (83.33%), a clear description and distribution of the performance were
given. One study (16.66%) precisely stated how the ground truth (AI’s reference stand-
ards) was established, whereas two utilized AI models that were improperly trained. In-
sufficient descriptions of ground truth assignments were the leading cause of quality
point reductions. Finally, 50% of the employed studies failed to disclose a declaration of
conflict of interest.
Figure 1. Quality assessment outcomes based on the MINORS tool.
3. Results
In total, 405 articles were retrieved: 390 from Scopus, 14 from PubMed, and 1 from
Semantic Scholar. The aforementioned inclusion/exclusion criteria led to 15 studies. Nine
further papers were removed due to unrelated information (e.g., those concentrating on
various movements or not quantifying post-operative recovery status). Taking into ac-
count all, six original articles were employed in this systematic review. The workflow di-
agram of the proposed literature search is depicted in Figure 2.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Disclosure
Study Aim
Input
Feature
Grouth Truth
Dataset
Performance
Figure 1. Quality assessment outcomes based on the MINORS tool.
3. Results
In total, 405 articles were retrieved: 390 from Scopus, 14 from PubMed, and 1 from
Semantic Scholar. The aforementioned inclusion/exclusion criteria led to 15 studies. Nine
further papers were removed due to unrelated information (e.g., those concentrating on
various movements or not quantifying post-operative recovery status). Taking into account
all, six original articles were employed in this systematic review. The workflow diagram of
the proposed literature search is depicted in Figure 2.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 6 of 12
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 13
Figure 2. Flow chart of the proposed literature search.
The included studies in this systematic review were classified into the following ap-
plication domains: (i) TKA surgery (5 studies) and (ii) ACL surgery (1 study). For each
study, the main results were quoted. The validity of each study is based on methodologi-
cal weaknesses and strengths. In addition, significant methodological aspects of the afore-
mentioned articles are discussed.
The employed studies in the current systematic review are listed in Table 3. In par-
ticular, it describes the recent use of ML models to the evaluation of the recovery status
following knee surgery utilizing gait data as the primary data source.
Table 3. Results of the employed studies.
Category Author Year Task Data Subjects
Feature
Engineering
Machine Learning Validation Results
TKA
Emmerzaal
et al. [24]
2022 Classification IMU
20 healthy controls,
19 with unilateral
knee OA and 17 post
TKA
LR
5-fold cross
validation
(CV)
67.3%
Accuracy
Young-
Shand et al.
[25]
2022 Classification
3D Gait
analysis
135 pre TKA and
109 post TKA
Principal
component
analysis (PCA)
Hierarchical
agglomerative
(bottom-up)
cluster analysis
- -
Jones et al.
[26]
2016 Classification
3D Gait
analysis
12 subjects with
cruciate-retaining
TKA, 12 subjects
with mobile-bearing
medial UKA and
121 healthy controls
- DT -
92% Accuracy
at heathy
group
Martins et
al. [27]
2015 Classification IMU
TKA operated and
control leg
Linear principal
component
analysis (PCA)
and nonlinear
kernel-PCA
(KPCA)
Multiclass SVM 6-fold CV 98% Accuracy
Kuntze et
al. [28]
2015 Classification EMG
10 unilateral gender-
specific TKA and 9
healthy controls
Wavelet
transform
SVM
leave-one-out
cross-
validation
(LOOCV)
Biceps femoris
(BF)
recognition
rate at 73.7%
and vastus
medialis (VM)
recognition
rate at 68.4%
Figure 2. Flow chart of the proposed literature search.
The included studies in this systematic review were classified into the following appli-
cation domains: (i) TKA surgery (5 studies) and (ii) ACL surgery (1 study). For each study,
the main results were quoted. The validity of each study is based on methodological weak-
nesses and strengths. In addition, significant methodological aspects of the aforementioned
articles are discussed.
The employed studies in the current systematic review are listed in Table 3. In par-
ticular, it describes the recent use of ML models to the evaluation of the recovery status
following knee surgery utilizing gait data as the primary data source.
Table 3. Results of the employed studies.
Category Author Year Task Data Subjects
Feature
Engineering
Machine
Learning Validation Results
TKA
Emmerzaal
et al. [24]
2022 Classification IMU
20 healthy
controls, 19 with
unilateral knee
OA and 17 post
TKA
LR
5-fold cross
validation
(CV)
67.3%
Accuracy
Young-
Shand et al.
[25]
2022 Classification
3D Gait
analysis
135 pre TKA and
109 post TKA
Principal
component
analysis
(PCA)
Hierarchical
agglomera-
tive
(bottom-up)
cluster
analysis
- -
Jones et al.
[26]
2016 Classification
3D Gait
analysis
12 subjects with
cruciate-
retaining TKA,
12 subjects with
mobile-bearing
medial UKA and
121 healthy
controls
- DT -
92%
Accuracy
at heathy
group
Martins
et al. [27] 2015 Classification IMU
TKA operated
and control leg
Linear
principal
component
analysis
(PCA) and
nonlinear
kernel-PCA
(KPCA)
Multiclass
SVM 6-fold CV
98%
Accuracy
Kuntze
et al. [28] 2015 Classification EMG
10 unilateral
gender-specific
TKA and 9
healthy controls
Wavelet
transform
SVM
leave-one-
out
cross-
validation
(LOOCV)
Biceps
femoris
(BF)
recognition
rate at
73.7% and
vastus
medialis
(VM)
recognition
rate at
68.4%

--- PAGE 7 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 7 of 12
Table 3. Cont.
Category Author Year Task Data Subjects
Feature
Engineering
Machine
Learning Validation Results
ACL Kokkotis
et al. [29]
2022 Classification
3D Gait
analysis
ACLD 44, ACLR
54 and healthy
Control 53
ReliefF
algorithm
XGBoost, RF,
DT, Naïve
Bayes, SVM,
KNN,
LR, NN
70%
training
and 30%
testing
94.95%
accuracy
(SVM)
3.1. TKA Surgery
In 2015, Kuntze et al., worked on the identification of multi-muscle activation patterns
changes in 10 post-surgery female TKA patients during walking [28]. To achieve this
goal, they recorded surface electromyograms (EMG) from 7 lower limb muscles. They
employed a wavelet transform algorithm for feature engineering and an SVM classifier
for machine learning. They demonstrated that the recognition rates for the VM and
BF activation patterns were 68.4% and 73.7%, respectively. Hence, stated that altered
muscle activations for the vastus medialis and biceps femoris, along with distinct between-
group differences, were effectively noted. In another approach, Martins et al., proposed
a gait analysis approach to determine differences and similarities in gait performance
between three assistive devices in the rehabilitation process of TKA patients [27]. In
order to attain this objective, they used postural control parameters, spatiotemporal, and
symmetrical indexes in combination with feature reduction techniques such as nonlinear
kernel-PCA (KPCA) and linear PCA. They used a multiclass SVM for classification, and this
combination of KPCA and MSVM achieved an accuracy of 98%. Furthermore, Jones et al.
proposedamachinelearningapproachinordertocomparehealthy, unicompartmentalknee
arthroplasty (UKA) and TKA patients (total subjects: 145) [26]. In their experimental study,
the subjects walked on a treadmill, and 27 gait-related variables were employed for the
classification task using decision trees classifiers. They stated that 5% of the healthy subjects
were classified as UKA and 92% of them as UKA. Furthermore, DTs demonstrated that
factors associated with the initial heel strike were frequently used to differentiate between
TKA and UKA individuals. In addition, UKA subjects had a higher first peak force and a
faster weight acceptance rate than the TKA subjects and were similar to healthy subjects.
Emmerzaal et al. investigated if the functional recovery status after TKA can be esti-
mated by a classification model [24]. In total, 17 inertial measurement units were used to
record different tasks (e.g., walking and descending stairs). A comparison investigation
led them to the conclusion that an LR classifier trained on six weeks of post-operative
biomechanical data during walking was responsive to changes at 3, 6, and 12 months
post-TKA (with a 67.3% accuracy). In contrast with the other studies, Young-Shand et al.
identified clusters among TKA candidates and postoperatively using knee biomechanical
parameters during gait and demographic data and machine learning cluster analysis [25].
They performed 3D gait analysis on 134 pre- and 105 post-TKA patients, and they used
PCA as a feature reduction technique. Using hierarchical agglomerative cluster analysis
employing Ward’s minimum variance criteria, they identified four sex-specific and biome-
chanical clusters. It was finally concluded that patients’ cluster classification could be
used for the formulation of personalized treatment strategies. They demonstrated that
improvements in gait biomechanics following TKA were cluster-specific. Clusters 2 and 3
had the largest improvement in knee joint kinematics and kinetics after TKA, as compared
with clusters 1 and 4, with superior function. In addition, none of the gait kinematic or
kinetic factors improved from pre-TKA to post-TKA despite the fact that cluster 1 was
small and statistical power was low.
3.2. ACL Surgery
In this category, only one study has been included. Specifically, Kokkotis et al. pro-
posed an explainable ML approach to: (i) determine significant gait kinetic and kinematic
parameters and quantify their relevance to the diagnosis of ACL injury and (ii) explore

--- PAGE 8 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 8 of 12
the variations in sagittal plane kinetics and kinematics data of the gait cycle between ACL
deficient (ACLD), ACL reconstructed (ACLR) and healthy (control) subjects [29]. The study
enrolled 151 subjects (ACLD 44, ACLR 54, and Control 53) with a total of 657 gait trials.
The Relief algorithm was employed to decrease the feature dimensionality of the problem.
Furthermore, a comparative analysis was finally performed to identify the best-performing
classification model. For this aim, eight well-known classifiers were employed. The best
score was achieved (94.95% accuracy) by the SVM classifier, which employed 21 biome-
chanical parameters. Furthermore, they discussed the impact of the identified parameters
on the classification task via SHAP. Previous studies, which are based on traditional statis-
tics, have noticed altered gait biomechanical parameters in ACL injuries [30–32]. On the
3-class problem, they demonstrated that the model output was significantly affected by
the minimum knee flexion angle during the stance phase, maximum hip flexion angle
during the swing phase, maximum plantar-flexion angle over the entire gait cycle, an-
terior (propulsive) GRF peak, second medial GRF peak, peak knee flexion angle during
stance phase, maximum dorsiflexion moment during stance phase and first medial GRF
peak biomechanical parameters. Most of these variables are consistent with the existing
literature [30].
3.3. Subject Characteristics
In the TKA category, Emmerzall et al., used 20 healthy subjects as the control group,
19 subjects with unilateral knee OA and 17 of them, which were re-evaluated at 1.5, 3, 6, and
12 months post-TKA surgery with the main aim to develop an ML model for monitoring
functional recovery status post-TKA [24]. The main inclusion criteria were knee OA and
the wait time for total knee replacement. Young-Shand et al. employed 135 subjects 1 week
before and 109 subjects one year post-TKA with the main aim to determine clusters among
TKA candidates and compare gait differences between clusters post-surgery [25]. The main
inclusion criterion was the ability to walk 6 m without a walking aid. Jones et al. performed
gait comparisons of unicompartmental and TKA with healthy individuals. During their
study, 145 subjects were enrolled, of which 121 were healthy, 12 with mobile-bearing medial
UKA, and 12 with TKA. The inclusion criterion was a 12-month period after knee surgery.
Martins et al. employed 13 elderly patients with KOA who were subjected to TKA in
order to recognize similarities and differences in gait performance between 3 assistive
devices [27]. Furthermore, Kuntze et al., worked with 10 post-TKA subjects and 9 control
subjects in order to identify multi-muscle activation pattern alterations in post-operative
female TKA patients [28]. They included subjects with the ability to accomplish activities
of daily living.
In contrast with the TKA studies, in the ACL category, Kokkotis et al. employed
151 subjects (ACLD: 44, ACLR: 54, and control: 53) in order to recognize significant
biomechanical parameters associated with ACL injury [29]. The ACLD subjects participated
in this study on average 30 days post-knee injury. The ACLR subjects participated for at
least 6 months after the knee surgery, and the control subjects declared that they had no
history of neurologic disorder or ACL of the lower extremities in the last 12 months.
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The current systematic review identified six original articles which showcased the
current usage of AI tools in the challenge to quantify the recovery status of the rehabilitation
process in post-knee surgery subjects. From the literature review, it emerged that this area
of research is untapped. There is a gap in the existence of literature before 2019, which is
possibly resulting from the limited computing power and the non-existence of big data in
this field.
Patients’ enrolment: The enrolled populations in the identified studies varied in size,
ranging from small samples of 13 patients to larger samples of 244 subjects. Most of the
studies included patients with knee osteoarthritis (OA) before and after knee surgery, and
some also included control subjects. One study included a subset of the sample that was re-

--- PAGE 9 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 9 of 12
evaluated at multiple time points post-total knee arthroplasty (TKA) surgery. Additionally,
one study focused on comparing the gait characteristics of patients with mobile-bearing
medial unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (UKA) to those of patients with TKA. Overall,
the enrolled populations in these studies represented a diverse range of individuals with
different diagnoses, conditions, and stages of recovery, providing valuable insights into the
effects of different knee surgery interventions on gait and mobility.
Input data: As input data, the majority of the studies used biomechanical data, which
comes from a motion capture system (the Golden Standard System), and the capture type
is called 3D clinical gait analysis [33]. Specifically, two studies in the TKA category and the
only study of its kind in the ACL category employed this type of data. In contrast to the
aforementioned studies, two of five studies in the TKA category used IMU data, and only
one out of five studies used EMG from gait. (Figure 3). Specifically, the input data used in
the studies include kinematic data (from IMU and camera-based systems), kinetic data, and
EMG data during the gait cycle. These data were used to study various aspects of gait, such
as gait biomechanics, gait patterns, muscle activations, and the effects of different assisted
devices, among total knee arthroplasty (TKA) subjects, unicompartmental knee arthroplasty
(UKA) subjects, subjects with acute anterior cruciate ligament deficiency (ACLD), subjects
with anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR), and control subjects.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 13
bearingmedial unicompartmental kneearthroplasty(UKA)tothose ofpatientswithTKA.
Overall, the enrolled populations in these studies represented a diverse range of individ-
uals with different diagnoses, conditions, and stages of recovery, providing valuable in-
sights into the effects of different knee surgery interventions on gait and mobility.
Input data: As input data, the majority of the studies used biomechanical data, which
comes from a motion capture system (the Golden Standard System), and the capture type
is called 3D clinical gait analysis [33]. Specifically, two studies in the TKA category and
the only study of its kind in the ACL category employed this type of data. In contrast to
the aforementioned studies, two of five studies in the TKA category used IMU data, and
only one out of five studies used EMG from gait. (Figure 3). Specifically, the input data
used in the studies include kinematic data (from IMU and camera-based systems), kinetic
data, and EMG data during the gait cycle. These data were used to study various aspects
of gait, such as gait biomechanics, gait patterns, muscle activations, and the effects of dif-
ferent assisted devices, among total knee arthroplasty (TKA) subjects, unicompartmental
knee arthroplasty (UKA) subjects, subjects with acute anterior cruciate ligament defi-
ciency (ACLD), subjects with anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR), and con-
trol subjects.
Figure 3. Type of data of the employed studies.
Learning, validation, and explainability: Several ML models were used in the aforemen-
tioned studies. Three out of six studies applied SVM classifiers. One of them used a Lo-
gistic regression classifier, and another one used DT. As supervised learning, one out of
sixstudies worked with hierarchicalagglomerative(bottom-up)clusteranalysis.Kokkotis
et al. presented a comparative analysis. They used various ML models such as XGBoost,
Random Forest, DTs, Naïve Bayes, SVM, KNN, LR, and NN [29].
Various validation strategies were recorded in the employed studies. The most fre-
quent was the k-fold cross-validation strategy. Furthermore, one [29] of the six studies
used a 70% training/30% testing validation strategy, and one of the six studies employed
LOOCV.
Only one of the six studies utilized explainability methods, which play a crucial role
in determining the reasoning behind the trained models’ decisions. Specifically, Kokkotis
et al. [29] developed a comprehensive method for quantifying the input biomechanical
Figure 3. Type of data of the employed studies.
Learning, validation, and explainability: Several ML models were used in the aforemen-
tioned studies. Three out of six studies applied SVM classifiers. One of them used a
Logistic regression classifier, and another one used DT. As supervised learning, one out of
six studies worked with hierarchical agglomerative (bottom-up) cluster analysis. Kokkotis
et al. presented a comparative analysis. They used various ML models such as XGBoost,
Random Forest, DTs, Naïve Bayes, SVM, KNN, LR, and NN [29].
Various validation strategies were recorded in the employed studies. The most fre-
quent was the k-fold cross-validation strategy. Furthermore, one [29] of the six studies used
a 70% training/30% testing validation strategy, and one of the six studies employed LOOCV.
Only one of the six studies utilized explainability methods, which play a crucial role
in determining the reasoning behind the trained models’ decisions. Specifically, Kokkotis
et al. [29] developed a comprehensive method for quantifying the input biomechanical

--- PAGE 10 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 10 of 12
factors’ contribution. They worked on a three-class problem to analyze the overall contri-
bution of features, as well as on three (one-versus-one) binary SVM models emphasizing
the contribution of features on each class.
It is noteworthy that none of the employed studies were validated against an external
dataset. Various limitations of the studies were highlighted. Various limitations were
observed in the reviewed studies. The small number of employed subjects, the feature
extraction [24], the non-use of transfer learning, the no existence of information on self-
reportedpatientscores, andtheabsenceofclinicalequipoiseintheopinionofbothclinicians
were the main limitations.
Limitations and future work: This paper is a systematic review that adheres to the
PRISMA recommendations but excludes a more formal quantitative meta-analysis. This
results from the observed heterogeneity of the identified studies as limitation can be
considered the fact that only three online databases (PubMed, Scopus, and Semantic
Scholar) were employed, and the exclusion of the grey literature may have led to the
identification of a relatively small number of included studies.
Future works should use robust feature selection techniques and advanced AI (e.g., ex-
plainability models and graphical models) for knowledge extraction. This knowledge can
be the input for powerful ML models. Furthermore, state-of-the-art DL models such as
Siamese convolutional neural network (CNN) and transfer learning should be applied to
biomechanical data from gait.
AI is a valuable tool for identifying gait-related changes in post-knee surgery patients.
The creation of robust explainable ML models for quantifying the recovery status during
the rehabilitation process and the understanding of the contribution of the selected gait
biomechanical parameters in the model’s output could lead to the creation of non-invasive
and more powerful diagnostic and prognostic tools for clinicians. Hence, AI in the field of
orthopedics may play a key role in forming new personalized rehabilitation interventions
for the modification of abnormal gait patterns and subsequently avoid the development of
knee OA.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.K., D.K. and T.T.; methodology, C.K., G.C., S.M. and
A.S.; validation, S.M., D.T. and D.P.; writing—original draft preparation, C.K., G.C., S.M. and A.S.;
writing—review and editing, V.M., D.P., N.A., D.K. and T.T.; visualization, A.S. and V.M.; supervision,
N.A., M.H., G.G. and T.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Louw, Q.; Grimmer, K.; Vaughan, K. Knee Injury Patterns among Young Basketball Players in Cape Town SA. Sport Med. 2003, 15,
9–15.
2. Clayton, R.A.; Court-Brown, C.M. The Epidemiology of Musculoskeletal Tendinous and Ligamentous Injuries. Injury 2008, 39,
1338–1344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Baugh, C.M.; Weintraub, G.S.; Gregory, A.J.; Djoko, A.; Dompier, T.P.; Kerr, Z.Y. Descriptive Epidemiology of Injuries Sustained in
National Collegiate Athletic Association Men’s and Women’s Volleyball, 2013–2014 to 2014–2015. Sport. Health 2018, 10, 60–69.
[CrossRef]
4. Woolf, A.D.; Pfleger, B. Burden of Major Musculoskeletal Conditions. Bull. World Health Organ. 2003, 81, 646–656.
5. Andrew, J.C.; Robertsson, O.; Graves, S.; Price, A.J.; Arden, N.K.; Judge, A.; Beard, D.J. Knee Replace. Lancet 2012, 379, 1331–1340.
6. Gunaratne, R.; Pratt, D.N.; Banda, J.; Fick, D.P.; Khan, R.J.; Robertson, B.W. Patient Dissatisfaction Following Total Knee
Arthroplasty: A Systematic Review of the Literature. J. Arthroplast. 2017, 32, 3854–3860. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Nunley, R.M.; Nam, D.; Berend, K.R.; Lombardi, A.V.; Dennis, D.A.; Della Valle, C.J.; Barrack, R.L. New Total Knee Arthroplasty
Designs: Do Young Patients Notice? Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 2015, 473, 101–108. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 11 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 11 of 12
8. Ajuied, A.; Wong, F.; Smith, C.; Norris, M.; Earnshaw, P.; Back, D.; Davies, A. Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury and Radiologic
Progression of Knee Osteoarthritis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am. J. Sport. Med. 2014, 42, 2242–2252. [CrossRef]
9. Hart, H.F.; Culvenor, A.G.; Collins, N.J.; Ackland, D.C.; Cowan, S.M.; Machotka, Z.; Crossley, K.M. Knee Kinematics and Joint
Moments during Gait Following Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Br. J.
Sport. Med. 2016, 50, 597–612. [CrossRef]
10. Roos, E.M.; Roos, H.P.; Lohmander, L.S.; Ekdahl, C.; Beynnon, B.D. Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS)—
Development of a Self-Administered Outcome Measure. J. Orthop. Sport. Phys. Ther. 1998, 28, 88–96. [CrossRef]
11. Irrgang, J.J.; Anderson, A.F.; Boland, A.L.; Harner, C.D.; Kurosaka, M.; Neyret, P.; Richmond, J.C.; Shelborne, K.D. Development
and Validation of the International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Form. Am. J. Sport. Med. 2001, 29, 600–613.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Tegner, Y.; Lysholm, J. Rating Systems in the Evaluation of Knee Ligament Injuries. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 1985, 198, 43–49.
[CrossRef]
13. Briggs, K.K.; Lysholm, J.; Tegner, Y.; Rodkey, W.G.; Kocher, M.S.; Steadman, J.R. The Reliability, Validity, and Responsiveness of
the Lysholm Score and Tegner Activity Scale for Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injuries of the Knee: 25 Years Later. Am. J. Sport.
Med. 2009, 37, 890–897. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Bennell, K.; Dobson, F.; Hinman, R. Measures of Physical Performance Assessments: Self-Paced Walk Test (SPWT), Stair Climb
Test (SCT), Six-Minute Walk Test (6MWT), Chair Stand Test (CST), Timed up & Go (TUG), Sock Test, Lift and Carry Test (LCT),
and Car Task. Arthritis Care Res. 2011, 63, S350–S370.
15. Mizner, R.L.; Petterson, S.C.; Clements, K.E.; Zeni, J.A., Jr.; Irrgang, J.J.; Snyder-Mackler, L. Measuring Functional Improvement
after Total Knee Arthroplasty Requires Both Performance-Based and Patient-Report Assessments: A Longitudinal Analysis of
Outcomes. J. Arthroplast. 2011, 26, 728–737. [CrossRef]
16. Cabitza, F.; Locoro, A.; Banfi, G. Machine Learning in Orthopedics: A Literature Review. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2018, 6, 75.
[CrossRef]
17. Harrell, F. rms: Regression Modeling Strategies. USA. 2022. Available online: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rms/
index.html (accessed on 19 September 2022).
18. Halilaj, E.; Rajagopal, A.; Fiterau, M.; Hicks, J.L.; Hastie, T.J.; Delp, S.L. Machine Learning in Human Movement Biomechanics:
Best Practices, Common Pitfalls, and New Opportunities. J. Biomech. 2018, 81, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Nweke, H.F.; Teh, Y.W.; Al-Garadi, M.A.; Alo, U.R. Deep Learning Algorithms for Human Activity Recognition Using Mobile and
Wearable Sensor Networks: State of the Art and Research Challenges. Expert Syst. Appl. 2018, 105, 233–261. [CrossRef]
20. Hu, B.; Dixon, P.; Jacobs, J.; Dennerlein, J.; Schiffman, J. Machine Learning Algorithms Based on Signals from a Single Wearable
Inertial Sensor Can Detect Surface-and Age-Related Differences in Walking. J. Biomech. 2018, 71, 37–42. [CrossRef]
21. Moher, D.; Liberati, A.; Tetzlaff, J.; Altman, D.G.; Altman, D.; Antes, G.; Atkins, D.; Barbour, V.; Barrowman, N.; Berlin, J.A.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement (Chinese Edition). J. Chin. Integr.
Med. 2009, 7, 889–896. [CrossRef]
22. Slim, K.; Nini, E.; Forestier, D.; Kwiatkowski, F.; Panis, Y.; Chipponi, J. Methodological Index for Non-randomized Studies
(MINORS): Development and Validation of a New Instrument. ANZ J. Surg. 2003, 73, 712–716. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Siouras, A.; Moustakidis, S.; Giannakidis, A.; Chalatsis, G.; Liampas, I.; Vlychou, M.; Hantes, M.; Tasoulis, S.; Tsaopoulos, D. Knee
Injury Detection Using Deep Learning on MRI Studies: A Systematic Review. Diagnostics 2022, 12, 537. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Emmerzaal, J.; De Brabandere, A.; van der Straaten, R.; Bellemans, J.; De Baets, L.; Davis, J.; Jonkers, I.; Timmermans, A.;
Vanwanseele, B. Can the Output of a Learned Classification Model Monitor a Person’s Functional Recovery Status Post-Total
Knee Arthroplasty? Sensors 2022, 22, 3698. [CrossRef]
25. Young-Shand, K.L.; Roy, P.C.; Dunbar, M.J.; Abidi, S.S.R.; Astephen Wilson, J.L. Gait Biomechanics Phenotypes among Total Knee
Arthroplasty Candidates by Machine Learning Cluster Analysis. J. Orthop. Res. 2022, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Jones, G.; Kotti, M.; Wiik, A.; Collins, R.; Brevadt, M.; Strachan, R.; Cobb, J. Gait Comparison of Unicompartmental and Total
Knee Arthroplasties with Healthy Controls. Bone Jt. J. 2016, 98, 16–21. [CrossRef]
27. Martins, M.; Santos, C.; Costa, L.; Frizera, A. Feature Reduction with PCA/KPCA for Gait Classification with Different Assistive
Devices. Int. J. Intell. Comput. Cybern. 2015, 8, 363–382. [CrossRef]
28. Kuntze, G.; von Tscharner, V.; Hutchison, C.; Ronsky, J. Multi-Muscle Activation Strategies during Walking in Female Post-
Operative Total Joint Replacement Patients. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 2015, 25, 715–721. [CrossRef]
29. Kokkotis, C.; Moustakidis, S.; Tsatalas, T.; Ntakolia, C.; Chalatsis, G.; Konstadakos, S.; Hantes, M.E.; Giakas, G.; Tsaopoulos,
D. Leveraging Explainable Machine Learning to Identify Gait Biomechanical Parameters Associated with Anterior Cruciate
Ligament Injury. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 6647. [CrossRef]
30. Kaur, M.; Ribeiro, D.C.; Theis, J.-C.; Webster, K.E.; Sole, G. Movement Patterns of the Knee during Gait Following ACL
Reconstruction: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sport. Med. 2016, 46, 1869–1895. [CrossRef]
31. Krishnan, C.; Johnson, A.K.; Palmieri-Smith, R.M. Mechanical Factors Contributing to Altered Knee Extension Moment during
Gait after ACL Reconstruction: A Longitudinal Analysis. Med. Sci. Sport. Exerc. 2022, 54, 2208–2215. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 12 ---
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 448 12 of 12
32. Tsarouhas, A.; Iosifidis, M.; Spyropoulos, G.; Kotzamitelos, D.; Tsatalas, T.; Giakas, G. Tibial Rotation under Combined in Vivo
Loading after Single-and Double-Bundle Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction. Arthrosc. J. Arthrosc. Relat. Surg. 2011, 27,
1654–1662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Uchida, T.K.; Delp, S.L. Biomechanics of Movement: The Science of Sports, Robotics, and Rehabilitation; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2021; ISBN 10: 026204420X.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- PAGE 13 ---
