
--- PAGE 1 ---
©Journal of Sports Science and Medicine (2010) 9, 353
http://www.jssm.org
Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function
Editors: Jacquelin Perry and Judith M. Burnfield
Bibliographic Data: ISBN: 978- 1556427664, 2010,
Slack Incorporated, New Jersey, $92.95, 551pages, hard-
cover
Subjects: Gait physiology, biomechanics of gait, gait
analysis.
DESCRIPTION: This text covers the work of Dr Jacque-
lin Perry in her years as a medical professional focusing
on the human gait with extensive contribution from Judith
M. Burnfield, PhD, PT.
PURPOSE: The aim of this second edition is to analyze
gait further by bringing the relevant data up to date and
covering current research, more sophisticated methods,
and the latest equipment available.
FEATURES: The text is broken down into six sections
as follows: I- Fundamentals which is divided into 3 chap-
ters: 1, Gait Cycle; 2, Phases of gait; 3, Basic Functions.
Section II, Normal Gait, covers chapters 4 to 9: 4, Ankle-
Foot Complex; 5, Knee; 6, Hip; 7, Head, Trunk, and Pel-
vis; 8, Arm; 9, Total Limb Function and Bilateral Syner-
gistic Relationships.
Section III, Pathological Gait, is from chapter 10 to
14: 10, Pathological Mechanisms; 11, Ankle and Foot
Gait Deviations; 12, Knee Gait Deviations; 13, Hip Gait
Deviations; 14, Trunk and Pelvis Gait Deviations.
Clinical Considerations are discussed in Section
IV: Chapter 15, Examples of Pathologic Gait; 16, Pediat-
ric Gait Analysis. Section V is for Advanced Locomotor
Function in chapter 17, Stair Negotiation an in 18, Run-
ning.
In section VI Quantified Gait Analysis is pre-
sented: Chapter 19, Gait Analysis Systems; 20, Motion
Analysis; 21, Muscle Control and Dynamic Electromyog-
raphy; 22, Kinetics of Gait: Ground Reaction; Forces,
Vectors, Moments, Power, and Pressure; 23, Stride
Analysis; 24, Energy Expenditure
AUDIENCE: Orthopaedic, physical therapy and other
rehabilitation professionals who are involved in muscu-
loskeletal patient care could easily use this is book as a
reference text. It can also be useful in designing some
athletic training programmes, physical therapy pro-
grammes and gait workshops.
ASSESSMENT: This is an extremely informative book
and an absolute asset for anyone who is studying and/or
dealing with physio-pathological lower limb biomechan-
ics.
Reviewed by: Fadıl Özyener MD, PhD, Uludag Univer-
sity Medical School, Bursa Turkey
Book review

--- PAGE 2 ---
