
--- PAGE 1 ---
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NORMATIVE GAIT DATABASE
Chester, V. L., Tingley, M., and Biden, E. N.
Institute of Biomedical Engineering
University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, New Brunswick
ABSTRACT
Normative data is an essential component of clinical
gait analyses. The Institute of Biomedical
Engineering (IBME) at the University of New
Brunswick has recently collected gait data from 58
normal children aged 1-13 years to establish a
normative database. A six-camera Vicon 512 motion
analysis system and force plates were employed to
obtain temporal-spatial, kinematic, and kinetic
parameters during walking. Statistical techniques,
which allow quantitative comparison between this
normative data and historical data from the
Children’s Hospital, San Diego, were used to assess
normality of the new database. Significant
differences between the 2 databases were found for
sagittal joint angle data. It was concluded that data
processing techniques and instrumentation are
associated with these differences.
INTRODUCTION
Walking is the result of the complex interaction of
active and passive forces acting about the joints of
the body. The underlying biomechanics and
neurophysiological mechanisms that facilitate
walking are often not appreciated until they are
impaired due to disease or injury. The loss or
alteration of a person’s walking skills greatly affects
their ability to function and their quality of life.
Clinical gait analysis aims to objectively quantify and
assess the mechanics of walking. These analyses are
critical to our understanding of normal and abnormal
gait and treatment effectiveness.
A critical component of gait analysis is the
availability of normative databases to compare
patient data. One of the main objectives of gait
analysis is to identify deviations in a patient’s gait
from ‘normal’ movement patterns. The underlying
causes of these abnormal movement patterns are then
identified and treatment recommendations are
formulated (Davis, 1997). A children’s gait database
that is commonly used for such analyses was
developed at the Children’s Hospital, San Diego
(Sutherland et al., 1988). The database contains joint
angle data for 348 gait cycles for children aged 1.0 to
7.0 years old. However, it is often difficult to
compare data across labs due to differences in marker
sets, data processing techniques, and reliability of the
clinician. As a result, caution must be exercised
when comparing patient data to normative results
obtained from other labs. Further difficulty in
comparing patient data to normative data sets is due
to advances in computer technology which have
dramatically improved motion analysis systems and
data processing capability over the last decade. For
example, San Diego used a manual digitization
motion analysis system and represented most angles
as planar projections. Currently, three-dimensional
analyses of gait using more sophisticated motion
capture and data analysis techniques are
commonplace in gait clinics.
Given the important role of normative data in gait
analyses and the difficulties associated with
comparing data across labs, the objective of this
study was to develop a normative database for the
Institute of Biomedical Engineering (IBME) at the
University of New Brunswick. In doing so, patient
data can be compared to normative data obtained by
the same clinician, equipment, marker systems, and
data processing techniques. As a result, more reliable
comparisons of data sets can be achieved. The
normative sagittal data was compared to historical
data from the Children’s Hospital in San Diego. In
addition, statistical classifiers were used to assess the
normality of the new database.
METHOD
Subjects
Fifty-eight children aged 1-13 years old were
recruited from the Fredericton area by distributing
research bulletins around the University of New
Brunswick campus and local daycare centres.
Parental consent was obtained prior to each child’s
participation in the study. Parents voluntarily
completed a questionnaire designed to identify
possible injuries or diseases that could affect their
child’s walking skills. No children were eliminated
from the study based on these responses.
Instrumentation/Apparatus
A Vicon 512 motion capture system (Oxford Metrics
Ltd.) was employed to track the three-dimensional
trajectories of reflective markers placed on the
subjects’ skin at a sampling frequency of 60 Hz. In
addition, two force plates (Kistler 9281B21 and
AMTI BP5918), collected the three-dimensional
ground reaction forces and moments during each gait
cycle. The plates were embedded at the center of a

--- PAGE 2 ---
6.7 X 0.9 meter wooden walkway. The walkway was
of sufficient length to allow each child to attain
steady state velocity through the recording area. Two
digital cameras, a weight scale, and calipers were
used to obtain anthropometric measures from each
subject.
Procedures
All data collection was conducted at the motion
analysis laboratory at the University of New
Brunswick. Twenty-one reflective markers,
representing key anatomical landmarks, were placed
on the skin of each subject (skin marker locations:
left and right heel, lateral malleolus, 2nd
metatarsal,
lateral epicondyle, greater trochanter, asis, shoulder;
sacrum and C7). To ensure accurate placement of
markers, participants were asked to wear minimal
clothing or bathing suits during data collection.
Participants were placed at specific locations at the
beginning of the walkway to ensure accurate foot
strikes on the force plates during the gait cycle. Each
child was encouraged to pay attention to objects (e.g.
toys) placed at the end of the walkway to avoid
targeting of the force plates. Several ‘warm-up’ trials
were conducted to allow the participants to adjust to
the markers and the walkway. Immediately
following completion of the gait trials, the reflective
markers were removed and a new segment inertia
marker set (Jensen, 1978) was applied. Participants
were then asked to stand in the anatomical position
within a calibration frame, while simultaneous front
and side digital photographs were taken.
Anthropometric data such as joint width, height and
mass were then measured.
Data Analysis
A comprehensive kinematic and kinetic analysis of
each child’s gait was performed. The criteria for
selection of gait trials for each child were based on
the following: 1) parental acknowledgment of a
‘normal’ gait cycle for their child and 2) successful
force plate strikes during the trial. From the selected
trials, cadence, velocity, and percent of cycle spent in
single stance were calculated for each gait cycle. The
single gait cycle, which most closely approximated
the mean of all gait cycles on these three measures,
was selected as the final trial for analysis. Joint
angles were then processed using two different
methods: 1) Euler angles, and 2) projected angles.
Euler Method
The body was modeled as a series of rigid links
joined by 3 degree of freedom articulations. The
model consisted of the left and right foot, shank,
thigh and the pelvis and trunk. Joint center locations
were estimated in accordance with Davis et al.,
(1991). Temporal-spatial measures and joint angles
were calculated from the three-dimensional
coordinates produced by the Vicon motion analysis
system. The three non-collinear markers on each
body segment were used to create embedded
coordinate systems at the joint centers. Joint angles
were computed from the relative orientations of the
embedded coordinate systems using Euler angles in a
yxz sequence, corresponding to flexion/extension,
adduction/abduction, and internal/external rotation.
The joint angle curves were approximated by a finite
Fourier series using 6 harmonics.
To calculate joint moments and power during
walking, the inertial properties of the segments are
required. A mathematical model (elliptical cylinder
method) of the human body was used to estimate the
segment inertial properties of each child (Jensen,
1978). This technique requires the digitization of the
full body images obtained from the digital
photographs of each participant in the anatomical
position. The model consists of 16 segments and
each segment is assumed to consist of elliptical
cylinders created at 1 cm intervals in the transverse
plane. Given that the volume and density of each
elliptical cylinder is known, the mass of each
elliptical cylinder is calculated. The segment mass,
center of mass location, and moments of inertia are
then calculated from the stacked elliptical cylinders
representing each segment.
Net joint moments and joint power for the hip, knee,
and ankle joints were estimated using the inverse
dynamics approach. This technique combines the
motion data, force plate data and segment inertial
data. The required absolute linear and angular
velocities and accelerations were calculated from the
embedded coordinate systems using a five-point
derivative. These data were filtered using a 6 Hz
low-pass Butterworth filter. Frictional torque, center
of pressure, and ground reaction forces were
computed from the force plate data. The data was
then smoothed using a 21 pt Hann moving window
average.
San Diego Projection Angle Method
Joint angle data were also computed for the
normative group using the projection angle
algorithms used by Sutherland et al., (1988). Similar
to Sutherland et al., the joint angle curves were
approximated by a finite Fourier series using 6
harmonics.
Statistical Analysis
Despite the vast amounts of data computed for the
normative database, only the sagittal hip, knee, and

--- PAGE 3 ---
ankle kinematics were analysed statistically to assess
the normality of the data. This was for 2 reasons: 1)
only kinematic data was readily available for
comparison from the San Diego Children’s Hospital,
and 2) sagittal hip, knee, and ankle joint angles tend
to demonstrate greater consistency across labs than
smaller rotations in other planes (Biden et al., 1987).
Therefore, more reliable comparisons were possible
using this reduced data set.
The statistical analysis was based on a one-
dimensional index of normal gait developed by
Tingley et al., (2002). Given that the amplitude of
joint angle data is sensitive to marker positioning
error, each child’s angular displacement curve was
recentered by subtracting its mean, prior to analysis.
To calculate the index of normal gait, Tingley et al.
calculated eleven interpretable functions from the
San Diego normative data. These functions represent
the mean sagittal joint angle patterns for hip, knee
and ankle (3 functions), the mean angular velocities
of the three joints (3 more functions), the angular
acceleration patterns of the three joints (3 functions),
and two functions which capture the primary
frequencies of knee and ankle angle patterns. A key
finding in Tingley’s study was that each child’s
pattern of variation from the group mean could be
approximated as a linear combination of these
interpretable functions. The gait index developed in
this work is simply a squared distance calculated in
11 dimensions (Mahalanobis distance). The gait
index classifies children as normal, abnormal, or
unusual based on calculations of population
percentiles.
We used the interpretable functions and covariance
matrix supplied by Tingley et al to calculate index
scores for the 71 left and right gait cycles collected at
UNB for children aged 3-13 yrs. Children under the
age of 3.0 years were omitted from this training, as
their gait patterns were immature (i.e. would be
classified as abnormal). The analysis classified
children’s gait patterns based on their deviation from
San Diego mean normative values. The statistical
classifier was then ‘recalibrated’ using the IBME
normative data. New values for the interpretable
functions and a new covariance matrix (required for
the distance calculation) were computed. New index
scores were calculated for the IBME data and the two
sets of classification results were compared. The
ability of the recalibrated index to detect abnormal
gait patterns was tested by computing the index for
children under the age of 3 years. A further
examination of the differences between the San
Diego and IBME normative data sets was conducted
using a multivariate analogue of the two sample t-test
of the joint angle data (Seber, 1984). These tests
compared differences between the San Diego data
and IBME’s Euler angle data, and San Diego and
IBME projected angle data.
RESULTS
The classification of IBME’s kinematic data for
children aged 3-13 years, based on San Diego mean
normative values, resulted in 49% of cycles being
classified as unusual or abnormal. However, when
the statistical classifier was recalibrated using the
IBME normative data, the new index gave results
similar to those of Tingley et al: the score behaved
like an F11,61 statistic for the training data, classifying
94% of cycles as normal. Further testing using the
gait patterns of younger children showed that the
classifier was also capable of detecting 80% of
immature (i.e. abnormal) gait patterns.
The differences between the two gait index
calculations were readily explained by appropriate
statistical tests: the first test compared the covariance
structure of sagittal angle displacement curves from
each lab, while the second test compared mean angle
patterns from each lab. Both tests yielded highly
significant P-values (p=0.000). Figure 1 shows the
IBME mean hip, knee and ankle joint angle curves (±
2 S.E.) with the San Diego mean normative data
superimposed. Although the graphs appear similar at
first glance, the two databases are quite distinct. For
example, the peak mean knee flexion between the
two databases is more than 2 standard errors apart.
When IBME angles were recalculated, using a
projected angle approach similar to that used at San
Diego, mean angle patterns were slightly closer to
those of San Diego, but still significantly different
(p=0.000). Figure 2 shows the mean results for knee
flexion for San Diego’s data, IBME’s Euler data, and
IBME’s projected angle data. IBME projected angles
are more similar to San Diego’s data at the beginning
and the middle of the gait cycle.
DISCUSSION
It is generally accepted that comparisons of data from
multiple labs should be conducted with caution. It is
possible that a patient’s gait data could be incorrectly
diagnosed as abnormal using normative data from
other labs. The results of this study suggest that
databases developed using different technological
and computational methods will show different
normative values. These differences were evident in
gait variables that are generally considered to be
consistent across gait labs. The significant
differences found between the San Diego and IBME

--- PAGE 4 ---
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
HipFlexion
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-20
0
20
40
KneeFlexion
D
e
g
r
e
e
s
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
AnkleDorsi/Plantarflexion
%ofCycle
Figure 1. Mean ± (2 S.E.) hip, knee, and ankle joint
angles for IBME normative data (thin lines) with San
Diego mean data superimposed (thick lines).
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
% Cycle
D
e
g
r
e
e
s
Figure 2. Mean results for knee flexion angles using
IBME’s euler (_) and projected angle data (---) and
San Diego projected angle data (_ -).
normative databases are likely due to a combination
of factors. The results of the multivariate analyses
show that the data differ in part due to the algorithms
used to calculate the joint angles. IBME’s normative
data showed more similarity to the San Diego values
when joint angles were calculated as projected angles
instead of Euler angles. This is expected as
Sutherland et al., (1988) also used projected angles to
compute their data. The databases may also vary
because of other differences in data processing
techniques such as the number of samples used to
compute the joint angles and methods used to
identify joint center locations. Differences in the
motion analysis systems used to collect the databases
could also be a factor. Sutherland et al. used a
pseudo three-dimensional, manual digitization
system. In contrast, IBME uses a three-dimensional,
semi-automatic digitization system. Therefore,
efforts to develop normative databases using more
current techniques are needed.
The results of the one-dimensional index of normality
suggest that the retrained classifier should be used for
future gait analyses at IBME when Euler angles are
used. An interesting finding was that the recalibrated
index of normality identified 80% of cycles for
children under 3 years old as unusual or abnormal.
This supports the findings of Tingley et al. that the
eleven interpretable functions can successfully
classify gait patterns.
CONCLUSION
Gait analyses using three-dimensional Euler angles
should refer to normative data developed using the
same algorithms. In addition, statistical classifiers of
gait normality should be recalibrated on more recent
databases. Efforts to develop new and large
normative databases with modern equipment and
processing techniques are warranted. Normative data
from this study is available at
www.math.unb.ca/~maureen/gait.
REFERENCES
Biden, E.N., Olshen, R.A., Sutherland, D.H., Gage, J., & Kadaba,
M. (1987). Comparison of gait data from multiple labs.
Transactions of the Orthopaedic Research Society, January.
Davis, R. B. (1997). Reflections on clinical gait analysis. Journal
of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 7 (4), p. 251-257.
Jensen, R. K. (1978). Estimation of the biomechanical properties
of three body types using a photogrammetric method. Journal of
Biomechanics, 11, 349-358.
Seber, G. (1984). Multivariate Observations. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Sutherland, D.H., Olshen, R.A., Biden, E.N., & Wyatt, M.P.
(1988). The Development of Mature Walking. London: MacKeith
Press.
Tingley, M., Wilson, C., Biden, & Knight, W. (2002). An index
to quantify normality of gait in young children. Gait and Posture,
(In Press).

--- PAGE 5 ---
