
--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025 4115
Transfer Learning of Human Activities Based on
IMU Sensors: A Review
Sara Ashry , Supratim Das, Mahdie Rafiei , Jan Baumbach , and Linda Baumbach
Abstract—This systematic review comprehensively scru-
tinizes transfer learning (TL) methods applied to human
activity recognition (HAR) using inertial measurement unit
(IMU) data. Our objective is to provide a comprehensive
resource for researchers and developers by summarizing the
existing activities, feature extractions, and TL techniques in
the related studies. Moreover, we identify research gaps in
these categories, allowing research endeavors to address
these gaps in the future. Our methodology follows the struc-
ture of the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta-analysis (PRISMA) statement by formulating pre-
cise research questions, establishing search queries, and specifying inclusion and exclusion criteria for study selection.
Finally, we extracted and summarized the existing activities, feature extractions, and TL techniques utilized in the
included studies. We analyzed 447 studies from PubMed, ACM, and Scopus datasets, of which we ultimately selected
33 pivotal studies that met our inclusion criteria. Overall, we found that TL has enhanced HAR performance by reusing
pretrained models. However, it is important to carefully select relevant transfer information to avoid any potential adverse
effects. We conclude that there is a lack of studies assessing specific activities, such as personal hygiene and elder
care, using IMU sensors and TL. To improve signal representation, a combination of features based on activity nature
is important. Aligning algorithms with activity nature is essential—simpler models like AlexNet are suitable for routine
activities such as walking, while more complex models like DenseNet are better for intricate tasks like cleaning. Our
review is a reference for advancing the understanding of TL’s potential of HAR using IMU data.
Index Terms—Accelerometer, human activity recognition (HAR), inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensors, preferred
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMAs), systematic review, transfer learning (TL).
NOMENCLATURE
ADL Activity of daily living.
HAR Human activity recognition.
ML Machine learning.
DL Deep learning.
TL Transfer learning.
FFT Fast Fourier transform.
Received 29 August 2024; revised 21 November 2024;
accepted 25 November 2024. Date of publication 9 December 2024;
date of current version 31 January 2025. This work was supported
by the Open Access Publication Fund of Hamburg University. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
for publication was Prof. Ling Pei. (Corresponding author: Sara Ashry.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. The
authors confirm that all human/animal subject research procedures and
protocols are exempt from review board approval.
Sara Ashry is with the Computational Systems Biology Institute
(CoSy.Bio), Hamburg University, 22761 Hamburg, Germany, and also
with the Department of Computers and Systems, Electronic Research
Institute, Cairo 12622, Egypt (e-mail: sara.ashry@ejust.edu.eg).
Supratim Das, Mahdie Rafiei, and Jan Baumbach are with the Com-
putational Systems Biology Institute (CoSy.Bio), Hamburg University,
22761 Hamburg, Germany.
Linda Baumbach is with the Institute for Health Economics and Health
Services Research, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE),
20246 Hamburg, Germany, and also with the Center for Bioinformatics,
University of Hamburg, 22761 Hamburg, Germany.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSEN.2024.3510097
JDA Joint distribution adaptation.
CWT Continuous wavelet transform.
DNN Deep neural network.
ResNet Residual network.
VAEs Variational autoencoders.
PRISMA Preferred reporting items for systematic
reviews and meta-analyses.
Gyro Gyroscope.
Mag Magnetometer.
Acc Accelerometer.
RMS Root mean square.
DC Direct component.
STD Standard deviation.
HC Horizontal concatenation.
AM Acceleration magnitude.
GTB Gradient tree boosting.
VGG Visual geometry group.
TransEMDT Transfer learning embedded decision tree.
I. INTRODUCTION
HAR is a critical field within the realm of artificial
intelligence and machine learning that focuses on the
automatic identification and classification of human activities
based on sensory data [1]. HAR systems utilize a variety
1558-1748 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 2 ---
4116 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
of sensors, with IMUs, which consist of accelerometers and
gyroscopes, being particularly valuable for capturing human
motion [1]. The importance of HAR plays a pivotal role
in monitoring and understanding human behavior; among
various applications, such as in healthcare, it is used to
monitor patient activity, aiding in remote patient care and fall
detection [2]. Also, HAR helps track and analyze athletes’
performance in sports and fitness, improving training regi-
mens [3]. It aids in evaluating athletes’ movements, offering
valuable insights for coaching. HAR also contributes to smart
home appliances, improving energy efficiency and comfort [4],
while also empowering individuals with disabilities through
assistive technologies, making daily tasks more accessible by
responding to specific gestures. It improves worker safety and
productivity by detecting working hours and behavior [5].
In security and surveillance, HAR becomes a critical tool for
identifying suspicious behavior in public spaces [6].
While traditional machine learning and deep learning have
achieved significant success and have been applied in many
practical applications [7], [8], they exhibit limitations in
specific real-world scenarios. Ideally, deep learning thrives
when there is an abundance of labeled training data sharing
the same distribution as the test data. However, in numerous
scenarios, gathering sufficient real-world training data proves
to be costly, time-consuming, or even unfeasible. For example,
collecting IMU-labeled data for rare or unpredictable activities
like fall detection in the elderly can be challenging due to
the infrequency of such events. Similarly, gathering IMU data
for monitoring worker safety makes it difficult to obtain a
sufficiently large and representative dataset. To address this
challenge, semi-supervised learning provides a partial solution
by reducing the dependence on massive, labeled data [9]. Typ-
ically, a semi-supervised approach necessitates only a limited
set of labeled data while leveraging unlabeled data to enhance
accuracy. However, in some instances, procuring unlabeled
data remains challenging, often resulting in unsatisfactory
outcomes for traditional models.
TL is presented as a promising learning methodology
focused on knowledge transfer between domains that offers
a compelling solution to the problem [8], [10], [11]. TL can
leverage knowledge gained from one task to improve perfor-
mance on a different but related task [12]. In the context
of HAR, TL involves using pretrained models on large
datasets to initialize or adapt models for activity recogni-
tion tasks. These techniques help address challenges such
as limited labeled data in HAR. The roots of TL can
be traced back to educational psychology, particularly the
generalization theory of transfer by psychologist Judd [13].
According to this theory, transferring knowledge from one
situation to another hinges on the generalization of experience.
Crucially, a connection between two learning activities is
essential for transfer to occur, as shown in Fig. 1. In practical
terms, individuals who have learned to play the violin may
pick up the piano faster than others because both instru-
ments share common knowledge, inspired by the human
ability to transfer knowledge across domains, as visualized
in Fig. 2.
Fig. 1. Examples of TL across different domains include skill transitions
such as riding a bicycle to driving a scooter, handwriting to keyboard
typing, playing the violin to the piano, and walking to running.
Fig. 2. TL of different scenarios of somehow similar human activities
such as driving a car to drive a motorbike, manual to digital payment,
and skateboarding activity to other types of skating.
TL leverages a model pretrained on one dataset to accelerate
learning and improve performance on a different, but related,
dataset. TL employs various approaches: One is fine-tuning,
where pretrained models like CNNs or RNNs are adapted to
new HAR tasks by freezing the weights of the pretrained
model and then modifying and training the final layers on
the target HAR dataset, as demonstrated [14], [15]. Another
approach is transferred feature extraction, where pretrained
models extract meaningful representations from IMU data to
improve accuracy. Additionally, multitask learning involves
training a model on multiple related tasks simultaneously to
harness shared knowledge, thereby enhancing performance.
Moreover, domain adaptation aims to reduce discrepancies
between the source and target domains, further improving
effectiveness.
However, transferred knowledge does not always yield
positive results for new tasks. Success largely depends on
the degree of commonality between domains; if common-
alities and similarities are rare, knowledge transfer may
fail [16], [17]. For instance, learning to ride a bicycle does not
expedite learning to play the piano [18]. Additionally, similar-
ities between domains do not consistently facilitate learning,
as sometimes they can be misleading. A practical example is
the challenge faced by Spanish speakers when learning French
despite the linguistic similarities. Speaking Spanish does not
guarantee fluency in French due to significant differences
in vocabulary, conjugation, pronunciation, and usage [18].
In psychology, this phenomenon is termed negative transfer,
and in the context of TL, it is also referred to as negative
transfer [18], [19]. The occurrence of negative transfer hinges
on various factors, including the relevance between the source
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
ASHRY et al.: TRANSFER LEARNING OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES BASED ON IMU SENSORS: A REVIEW 4117
Fig. 3. Summary of TL problems and approaches [22].
and target domains and the learner’s ability to identify transfer-
able and advantageous knowledge components across domains
[20], [21].
A summary of TL problems and approaches is presented
in Fig. 3 [22]. Broadly speaking, TL, based on domain
discrepancies, can be categorized into homogeneous and het-
erogeneous TL [22]. Homogeneous TL techniques are tailored
for scenarios where domains share the same feature space,
such as recognizing walking in an indoor environment and
jogging/running outdoors based on the same set of sensors
(accelerometers and gyroscopes). On the other hand, het-
erogeneous TL deals with scenarios where domains possess
distinct feature spaces, such as one domain using smart-
phone accelerometer data, while another uses smartwatch
gyroscope and heart rate data. In addition to distribution
adaptation, heterogeneous TL requires adaptation of feature
spaces, rendering it more complex than homogeneous TL.
In TL, transudative transfer focuses on applying knowledge
to specific, closely related target tasks, while inductive trans-
fer is about using knowledge from the source to enhance
learning across a wider and more diverse range of target
tasks. TL approaches can be categorized into instance-based
(selecting relevant source instances for the target domain),
feature-based (aligning features between domains, either sym-
metrically or asymmetrically), parameter-based (transferring
learned model parameters), and relational-based methods
(transferring knowledge of data relationships) as shown
in Fig. 3.
Motivations and Rationale of Applying TL in HAR: TL
has emerged as a focal point in HAR for many compelling
reasons, primarily centering around its potential to enhance
accuracy and performance in HAR applications [23]. This
shift toward TL provides a host of benefits, addressing various
challenges and limitations encountered in traditional HAR
approaches, such as the need for extensive labeled data, and
the limited ability of models to generalize across diverse
activities and users. In summary, TL enhances data efficiency
and training speed by reusing pretrained models, making it
effective for small datasets and varied environments. It aids in
domain adaptation, improves model generalization, and saves
resources. Additionally, it addresses the curse of dimensional-
ity in high-dimensional data and reduces reliance on training
models through fine-tuning pretrained ones, increasing HAR
models’ applicability.
Main message and contributions:
1) We systematically summarize TL approaches for
HAR based on IMU sensors for 33 studies, which
may support researchers in selecting appropriate
TL approaches in practice.
2) We found that there is a scarcity of research studies
evaluating specific human activities collected via
IMU sensors and classified using TL, such as
holding items, personal hygiene, playing musical
instruments, gardening, caregiving for children, and
so on.
3) Furthermore, we highlight the challenges in TL
algorithms and feature extraction techniques (e.g.,
the complexity or simplicity of the algorithm
design and their potential performance across var-
ious activities and the challenge of transferring
features that accurately encapsulate a broad spec-
trum of activities). These insights may inform
future research directions, guiding researchers
toward areas requiring further investigation in the
context of HAR based on IMU.
The objective of this review is to comprehensively summa-
rize TL approaches for classifying human activities using IMU
sensors such as accelerometers, including existing activities,
data preprocessing, and feature extraction for researchers and
developers (see the graphical abstract figure). Besides, we aim
to highlight gaps in the existing studies related to the activ-
ities, feature extraction, and TL techniques investigated and
utilized. Therefore, we aim to answer the following research
questions:
A. What are common activities classified using TL tech-
niques based on IMU, and which have not yet been classified?
B. What feature extraction techniques have been used
in studies related to HAR, and what are their respective
limitations?
C. Which TL algorithms have been applied to HAR, and
what are their limitations?
The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section II
clarifies the systematic review methodology according to
PRISMA. The results and discussion are provided in
Section III. Recommendations to guide researchers are men-
tioned in Section IV; review limitations are mentioned in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4118 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
Section V, while the conclusion and future work are sum-
marized in Section VI.
II. METHODOLOGY
This literature review is following the PRISMA guide-
lines [24]. The studies were selected based on predefined
inclusion criteria; a list of potentially relevant publications
was included through the selection process of title and abstract
screening and full-text screening.
A. Eligibility Criteria
The studies included in our review needed to match the
following criteria.
1) Peer-reviewed publication with abstract in the English
language.
2) Report on the performance of physical HAR, including
sports and daily living activities, for example, movement
actions such as walking, running, exercise, and so on.
3) Include data collected from IMU sensors or the
accelerometer.
4) Use TL methods such as domain adaptation, pretrained
models, feature transfer, fine-tuning, and so on.
Studies were excluded if:
1) the publication was in the form of an abstract only,
a book, a newsletter, a report, and encyclopedias;
2) the studies used wearable cameras—image or video,
time-series data related to humidity sensors, Wi-Fi sig-
nal, GPS, radar, light sensors, sound sensors, speech,
or phonetic signals alone without IMU, and so on;
3) studies used robots to imitate human activities;
4) studies focused on nonphysical human activities such
as thinking, learning, communication, mental simulation
and visualization, self-awareness, and bio-signals such
as heart rate, blood pressure, and so on;
5) studies lacked adequate information about the method-
ology, dataset used, and results of performance TL in
physical HAR.
B. Information Sources
Relevant articles were searched in PubMed, Scopus, and
ACM Digital without limitation in publication date. No gray
literature was searched.
C. Search Strategy
Our search contained four subqueries, which were com-
bined with an AND operation. The main search terms of the
queries were: 1) activity recognition, 2) IMU data, 3) TL, and
4) human. The main search queries are provided in Table I.
More details about the search terms used to decide, if to
include an article or not, are mentioned in the Excel sheet.1
1https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1DjcxIwuZ6dyD-
meR70aqtXcZ0knkiUkeKcXQDsooPwY/edit?usp=sharing
TABLE I
MAIN SEARCH QUERY COMBINATION FOR DATASETS SEARCH
D. Search Process
The search was performed by the first author of this
publication on September 14, 2023. In the PubMed database,
we searched and downloaded data using the search option
title and abstract. In the ACM search strategy, the available
option on the website is to search by title or abstract only.
There is no option to search by title and abstract together. So,
we searched by title, then by abstract, and later combined
the results using Endnote software. In Scopus, there is a
limitation on the number of Boolean operators—a maximum
of eight, so we searched and downloaded data by devel-
oping a Python code using Scopus El-Sevier API https://
github.com/SaraAshryMhmd/Systematic_Review/tree/main.
E. Screening and Selection Process
The relevance of the article was evaluated first by title and
abstract and then by full-text screening for each identified
publication. This procedure was performed for each publi-
cation independently by the first author (Sara Ashry) and
subsequently carried out independently by the second and third
co-authors (Supratim Das and Mahdie Rafiei). Discrepancies
between co-authors were resolved through discussion.
F. Data Extraction
Of the included articles, the following information was
extracted: authors, datasets, and activities including type of
environment, sensors used and their location, number of par-
ticipants and sample size, methodology and TL approach used,
features extracted technique, the outcome of each research, key
points, and limitations of studies.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The process of selecting studies is visualized in the
PRISMA flowchart in Fig. 4. Here, we summarize the
33 included studies from 447 publications that identified HAR
based on IMU sensors. The underlying datasets, activities,
environment, sensors, number of participants, methodology
and TL approach, features extracted technique, the outcome
of each research, key points, and limitations of the included
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
ASHRY et al.: TRANSFER LEARNING OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES BASED ON IMU SENSORS: A REVIEW 4119
Fig. 4. PRISMA flowchart of the study based on inclusion and
exclusion.
Fig. 5. Distribution of the articles by year of publication.
studies are presented in Table I in the supplementary file.2
Below, after giving a broad overview of the included studies,
we present the activities used in these studies, the features
extracted, and the TL methodologies applied in tabular form.
The number of relevant publications per year increased in
the second half of the observed ten-year time interval. Thus,
the growing relevance of this review’s scope is confirmed
(see Fig. 5). The peaks in 2021 followed by 2023. Through
the 33 publications included in this review, 23 articles are
published in 16 different journals, where Sensors Journal is
the dominant journal among the publications, besides ten
papers are published in conference proceedings. In total, over
100 unique authors were involved in writing the 33 contribu-
tions. Their countries of affiliation are spread worldwide over
15 countries. None of the authors has participated in writing
more than two publications.
In the following paragraphs, we answer our posed research
questions.
A. What are common activities classified using TL tech-
niques based on IMU, and which activities have not yet been
classified?
Within the entire literature corpus, ADL activities are most
often represented, with the focus on locomotion [3], [10],
[11], [14], [15], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32],
2https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1DjcxIwuZ6dyD-meR70aqtXcZ0
knkiUkeKcXQDsooPwY/edit?usp=sharing
[33], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43],
[44], as shown in Table II. Twenty-five publications aim to
recognize the associated activities such as walking, running,
standing, and climbing stairs. Followed by seven papers
dealing with Household Chores Activities such as cooking,
ironing, opening/closing doors or fridge or drawer, cleaning
table, and toggle a switch in [8], ironing, vacuum clean-
ing [27], [42], reaching to shelf, and reaching to drawer [10],
followed by sports and exercises with five occurrences, such as
warm-up, cool down [32], Beach volleyball, Frisbee sport [45],
rope jumping, and running [27], as well as exercises such as
squats, deadlifts, lunges, single-leg squats, tuck jumps [39],
and boxing [26].
In addition to single publications on bathroom activities
including dressing, undressing, brushing teeth, using the toilet,
washing face, and washing hands [46], followed by transporta-
tion, hand gestures, work-related activities, health monitoring
activities [11], and child activities [28]. Noticeably, more
complex activities that require greater effort for recording
and labeling are represented less than simple ones, such as
locomotion. This is because the method of TL-HAR is the
focus of most publications using public datasets for evalua-
tion. Most public datasets prioritize the collection of easily
recordable daily activities, as outlined in Table II provided in
the supplementary document file.3
Exploring the realms of untouched activities by IMU sen-
sors using TL could vastly enhance our understanding of
human activity. Activities not yet studied and could be gath-
ered via IMU sensors and classified using TL, encompass the
following.
1) Human daily life activities include using mobile phones,
shopping, holding items on hands and shoulders, and
household chores such as cooking (stirring, chopping,
and packing), cleaning (dusting, mopping, doing laun-
dry, washing dishes, and cleaning the bed). House
gardening activities (planting flowers or vegetables,
watering plants, and pruning). Personal hygiene activ-
ities (showering, scrub body, hair oil massage, skin
care activities, combing hair, applying deodorant, using
perfume, nail clipping, etc.).
2) Leisure activities include indoor activities (reading
books, sewing, crocheting, crafting, playing musical
instruments, video gaming, and board games) as well as
fitness activities (weightlifting, basketball, tennis, kick-
ball, badminton, kickboxing, taekwondo, and squash),
outdoor sports activities (archery, obstacle courses,
parkour, rock climbing, cricket, skateboarding, fencing,
horseback riding, and skydiving), in addition to water
sports (swimming, water aerobics, water skiing, rowing,
and canyoning), and others such as dancing (Zumba,
salsa, etc.).
3) Health monitoring activities include taking medicine
on time, monitoring the sleep cycle, tracking physical
symptoms of diseases, and detecting eating habits.
3https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nnw4ptamwViNhVWhcWg3Fe1vD
hM1_4d6/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=113728544728428088441&rtpof=true&sd
=true
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
4120 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
TABLE II
ACTIVITIES THAT HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATED IN THE INCLUDED STUDIES OF THIS REVIEW
4) Others include taking care of children’s activities (hold-
ing a baby, changing diapers, pushing a stroller),
assisting elderly family members, and pet-care activities,
in addition to home maintenance (repairing appliances,
changing light bulbs, painting walls, and home dec-
orating). Hard work tasks such as construction work,
building paving, street cleaning services, and using tools
like hammers, screwdrivers, drillers, and so on.
Beyond these categories mentioned above, many other com-
plex activities create a diverse range of human endeavors. IMU
sensors could help improve the accuracy of recognizing all
these activities using advanced learning models.
B. What feature extraction techniques have been used
in studies related to HAR, and what are their respective
limitations?
Feature extraction for HAR-TL is an important stage.
It allows data to be represented compactly, which helps with
later classification stages. In this review, the feature extraction
techniques used in the included studies have been summarized
in Table III with their citations in each included paper in our
study. We have categorized them into the following subcate-
gories, each playing a crucial role in supporting TL models
for HAR.
1) Time-domain features (TDFs) capture the waveform
characteristics of the signal directly from the raw data.
These features include statistical measures such as mean,
variance, skewness, and entropy, as well as temporal
patterns like zero-crossing rate and rms [53]. They are
especially useful in TL models where the activities
across different datasets share similar temporal patterns.
For instance, features like mean and variance can be
transferred to recognize similar activities through differ-
ent databases, thereby supporting the generalization of
the model.
2) Frequency-domain features (FDFs) focus on the periodic
structure of the signal. For instance, Fourier transform
(e.g., FFT) is applied to raw signals to estimate the
spectral density, capturing the signal’s frequency compo-
nents [54], [55]. These features include spectral centroid,
signal energy, and frequency range. FDFs are crucial for
identifying consistent patterns across different datasets,
even when the time-domain representations differ. These
features enhance the robustness of TL models by captur-
ing invariant spectral properties that are common across
different activities or sensor setups. This makes them
particularly valuable for models that need to generalize
across varied conditions.
3) Automated features, such as those extracted from CNNs,
automatically learn to capture complex temporal and
spatial dependencies in the data, recognizing intricate
patterns over time and within the IMU signals [56], [57].
Automated features are at the forefront of HAR due to
their ability to eliminate the need for manual feature
engineering. These features are highly adaptable and
transferable, making them a recommended choice for TL
models as they improve the model’s performance with
minimal fine-tuning and make the model easier for new
tasks or environments with different characteristics [58].
4) Other techniques such as principal component analysis
(PCA), spectrograms, and kernel-based methods offer
further abstraction or transformation of the data. These
methods often simplify or highlight specific aspects of
the signal that are useful for TL. These techniques
provide additional layers of feature refinement. For
example, PCA can reduce dimensionality while retaining
the most important features [59], making TL models
more efficient and focused. Spectrograms transform
time-series data into a time–frequency representation,
capturing how frequency components evolve over time
and analyzing complex patterns that are not apparent
in the raw data which help in highlighting unique
signatures of different activities [60].
There are some limitations of features that are used to
recognize human activities using IMU sensors via TL, which
primarily stem from the challenge of transferring features
that encapsulate a broad spectrum of activities. The inher-
ent complexity and variability of human movements pose
considerable obstacles, affecting the system’s performance
in accurately capturing and generalizing across the diverse
range of human activities [61]. Features learned from daily
activities may not generalize well to athletic or industrial
settings due to differences in the environment and activity
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
ASHRY et al.: TRANSFER LEARNING OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES BASED ON IMU SENSORS: A REVIEW 4121
TABLE III
FEATURES THAT HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATED DURING THE STUDIES INCLUDED IN THIS REVIEW
execution. Disparities in sensor modalities, such as transferring
learning from accelerometers or gyroscopes to other sensors.
One of the present challenges is that certain features pertinent
to one may not apply to the other. Moreover, the sequential
nature of IMU time-series data necessitates capturing temporal
dependencies, which requires models specifically designed for
this purpose; otherwise, performance may suffer [62], [63].
The expansion of feature sets heightens models’ susceptibility
to overfit the specific characteristics of the training data.
This overfitting compromises the model’s ability to generalize,
reducing its effectiveness when dealing with new data. Con-
sequently, the predictive performance could have a notable
diminish in the real-world data, where data variability is
the norm. Furthermore, features extracted via deep learning
models are often opaque and not easily understandable, which
can be problematic when it is important to know how the
model makes its decisions [64]. Lastly, if the features of the
pretrained model do not match the new task, performance may
suffer unless the model is carefully adapted.
C. Which TL algorithms have been applied to HAR, and
what are their limitations?
The models that have been investigated during the studies
included in this review are summarized in Table IV and
categorized as follows.
1) Supervised learning used for TL like basic feed-forward
networks are pretrained on analogous datasets that
are effectively repurposed for IMU signal analysis for
simpler tasks [52]. Additionally, traditional machine
learning models like SVMs and Random Forests provide
a solid foundation for classification tasks. These models
benefit from being pretrained on related datasets, which
enhances their performance on new, similar tasks [28],
[34], [39], [40], [41]. For instance, pretrained SVMs
can classify IMU signals with improved accuracy when
fine-tuned on task-specific data.
2) Self-supervised and representative learning relevant
to TL like contrastive learning which leverages the
distinctiveness of activity patterns in IMU signals,
enhancing model performance without requiring labeled
data [26], [65]. For example, contrastive learning dis-
tinguishes sensor activities by mapping similar data
closer in the feature space and pushing dissimilar data
apart [66]. In TL, this pretraining enhances the model’s
ability to generalize and adapt to new tasks, especially
when labeled data is limited in the target domain.
Autoencoders, including variational autoencoders, are
a key technique in representation learning, which falls
under self-supervised learning. They are used for inte-
grating multidomain data and extracting latent features,
thereby facilitating model adaptation and enhancing TL
across various tasks [67].
3) CNN-based TL: pretrained CNN models like
ResNet, AlexNet, EfficientNet, MobileNet, DenseNet,
SqueezeNet, GoogleNet, and VGG-16 have been
utilized [68]. ResNet stands out with its residual blocks
that enable the training of exceptionally deep networks,
thereby significantly enhancing task performance [11],
[42]. Similarly, AlexNet laid the groundwork with its
convolutional layers [10], [11], paving the way for more
intricate architectures like EfficientNet, which optimizes
model scaling to balance efficiency with accuracy [3].
MobileNet offers an ideal solution for applications
demanding lightweight models with its depth with
separable convolutions that streamline complexity
without diminishing performance [25]. In a different
approach, DenseNet fosters feature propagation by
interconnecting each layer to every other, reducing the
need for numerous parameters [11]. SqueezeNet further
compresses model size through its innovative squeeze
and expands layers while maintaining a competitive
performance level [29]. GoogleNet’s inception modules,
which process multiple convolutions in parallel, allow
for capturing a wider range of features, a technique
further refined by VGG-16’s focus on increasing
network depth [14]. Beyond these, other CNN
architectures utilize pretrained models on expansive
datasets, transferring the learned features to smaller,
task-specific datasets with final layer adjustments [36].
4) Sequence and hybrid models for TL like LSTM and
CNN-LSTM models. The LSTM networks were adept
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
4122 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
TABLE IV
METHODS OR PRETRAINED MODELS THAT HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATED DURING THE STUDIES INCLUDED IN THIS REVIEW
at managing and capturing temporal dependencies in
sequential IMU signals [52] and sometimes combined
with CNNs to form hybrid models that exploit spatial
and temporal feature extraction capabilities [30], [47].
5) Generative models for TL, such as GANs, play a crucial
role in augmenting training data by generating synthetic
samples, thereby enhancing the robustness of the TL
process in IMU signal analysis [8], [69]. For example,
GANs can simulate rare or edge-case scenarios that are
underrepresented in the original dataset, enabling models
to better handle diverse and unexpected inputs during
real-world TL applications.
6) Domain adaptation techniques for TL such as the inno-
vative IPL-JPDA technique integrate domain adaptation
with improved pseudo-labeling to refine the alignment
between the source and target domains. This approach
optimizes the TL process, making models more effec-
tive in new environments [31]. For example, IPL-JPDA
adapts models from one type of IMU data to related
sensor data by enhancing domain alignment.
The challenges of applying TL methods to IMU sensor
data in HAR are multifaceted. Supervised learning approaches,
such as basic feed-forward networks, may not fully capture the
complexity of IMU signals related to intricate activities such
as complex obstacle course races. In addition to traditional
machine learning models such as SVMs and random forests,
often struggle to capture the nuanced features of IMU data as
effectively as deep learning counterparts and they may require
extensive fine-tuning to perform effectively [70].
Self-supervised methods like contrastive learning, which
relies on high-quality contrastive data pairs, can be limited
when the source and target domains are somehow differ-
ent [71]. Autoencoders, including variational autoencoders,
are valuable for extracting latent features and integrating
multidomain data but may not always generate optimal fea-
tures in the absence of sufficient labeled data [72], [73].
CNN-based models, such as AlexNet and ResNet, face chal-
lenges with feature redundancy and alignment with IMU data.
AlexNet, although it is a pioneering model, may not capture
the complex features of new IMU data of real-world parkour
or skydiving due to the model’s simpler architecture [74].
While ResNet is beneficial for its ability to learn deep features
through residual learning, it can sometimes lead to redundancy
in feature learning [75], and ResNet may not always align
with the target domain, leading to suboptimal transfer of
knowledge. EfficientNet requires intricate balancing to prevent
computational overload [76], a critical factor when dealing
with the limited computational resources often associated with
IMU data processing. MobileNet [77], optimized for mobile
devices, might not extract features with the required level for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
ASHRY et al.: TRANSFER LEARNING OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES BASED ON IMU SENSORS: A REVIEW 4123
the activity recognition tasks. DenseNet’s densely connected
layers can significantly increase computational demands, com-
plicating the adaptation process in TL to new domains [78].
Similarly, SqueezeNet’s limited feature representation further
complicates their adaptation to IMU data. GoogleNet’s incep-
tion modules and VGG-16’s depth could lead to overfitting and
are computationally intensive [79], which might hinder their
effective deployment in TL for IMU sensors, where model
adaptability is key.
Sequence models, including LSTMs and CNN-LSTM
hybrids, are adept at managing temporal dependencies but
can struggle with vanishing gradients and increased compu-
tational complexity [80]. Generative models such as GANs,
while powerful for augmenting training data, require careful
tuning to generate useful synthetic samples that are diverse
and representative enough to prevent issues such as mode
collapse and domain gap, which could otherwise impair model
performance [81].
The advanced domain adaptation technique IPL-JPDA
improves alignment between the source and target domains but
may not address all sensor-specific challenges, such as sensor
positioning and orientation [31]. These challenges highlight
the need for strategic model selection and adaptation to
ensure effective TL and accurate activity recognition in IMU
sensor-based HAR applications.
We can summarize that TL involves some hurdles, such
as dealing with diverse data due to variations in sensors,
placements, and human activities behaviors, which makes
adapting models across different domains challenging. Real-
time processing requirements add complexity, as models need
to balance accuracy with efficiency. So, these challenges
require a strategic approach to model selection and adaptation
to ensure effective knowledge transfer and accurate activity
recognition using IMU sensors.
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS
By adopting the following recommendations, we believe
that activity recognition systems using TL and IMU sensors
can achieve notable improvements in accuracy and efficiency.
We suggest the following strategies: aligning algorithms with
specific activity types, selecting features based on the nature of
the activities, choosing algorithms that handle the variability
and complexity of human activities efficiently in real-time
applications, and validating models alongside collecting rel-
evant robust datasets. Below, we explain the rationale behind
each recommendation as follows.
1) Align algorithms with activity types: for simple activities
like walking or standing, use models such as AlexNet
or SqueezeNet due to their efficiency in handling repet-
itive patterns. For complex activities involving rapid or
intricate movements, such as exercise or sports (com-
plex obstacle course races or skydiving, for example),
employ advanced models like ResNet, which is effi-
cient in recognizing complex patterns, or DenseNet,
which is effective for capturing detailed activity pat-
terns like cooking or cleaning. In health monitoring
activities, using sequence models like LSTM or hybrid
CNN-LSTM that specialize in detecting subtle changes
is crucial for precise health monitoring and rehabilita-
tion exercises. For efficiency considerations in real-time
applications, we suggest using lightweight models like
MobileNet, which are well-suited for mobile plat-
forms and simple activities due to their computational
efficiency.
2) Feature selection based on activity nature: we present
a few examples to guide feature selection based on
the specific characteristics of the activity. Time-domain
features could be helpful for basic activity recognition
tasks such as walking, standing, sitting, or lying down,
particularly when the activities have distinct, consistent
time patterns, and the signal characteristics do not
change rapidly. Frequency-domain features are useful
for activities where periodicity is key, such as rhythmic
movements in sports (e.g., running, cycling, etc.) or
repetitive household chores. As, they can capture the
regular, repetitive patterns of these activities. Time–
frequency-domain features for activities that involve
transitions or a mix of movements at different speeds,
(e.g., sit-to-stand) or activities that involve a mix of fast
and slow components (e.g., dancing). To improve signal
representation, a blend of handcrafted features—such
as autocorrelation, median, entropy, and instantaneous
frequency—could be employed [1]. Automated features
based on deep learning are suitable for recognizing
highly complex activities where manual feature extrac-
tion might miss important patterns, such as mixed sports
activities (complex obstacle course races), rehabilitation
exercises, or multimodal activities involving different
body parts, activities with sequential patterns like free
handwriting on papers or walls. Generally, combining
features from different domains can provide a more
comprehensive representation of the signal, improving
the accuracy of activity recognition. For example, inte-
grating time and frequency with automated features
allows capturing a wide range of activities with both
simple and complex patterns.
3) Algorithm Selection: considering the variability and
complexity of human activities when choosing TL
algorithms. Models like ResNet and EfficientNet offer
robust performance for diverse activities but may face
overfitting or computational issues. Simpler models may
not capture detailed features required for complex activ-
ities. Thus, balancing each algorithm’s strengths and
limitations is crucial for effective activity recognition.
4) Model Validation and Dataset Collection: Validate TL
models across a wide range of similar activities to
ensure robustness and generalization. When collecting
new datasets, include diverse participants with varying
nationalities, body structures, and health conditions to
improve dataset diversity and applicability to real-world
scenarios.
V. REVIEW LIMITATIONS
Our review has a few limitations. First, we only included
studies published in English, which could have a biased impact
on the analysis. High-quality surveys are typically published in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 10 ---
4124 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
English in high-impact journals, potentially excluding relevant
findings from other languages or less accessible sources.
Second, considering the rapid pace of research publication,
we might miss recent updates after searching databases and
selecting articles for this study, which could extend our latest
findings.
Third, the screening process for both title–abstract and
full-text was initially carried out by the first author (Sara
Ashry) and subsequently conducted independently by the
second and third co-authors (Supratim Das and Mahdie Rafiei),
thereby enhancing the study’s robustness, the data extraction
from the included articles was solely performed by one author
(Sara Ashry), potentially led to minor errors. Overall, even
though we were careful, there is still a chance of human error
and bias when selecting studies and extracting information for
this review, though it is small.
VI. CONCLUSION
This systematic review has examined 33 selected studies
of TL in HAR based on IMU data. We not only provided
insights into the activities covered, feature extraction tech-
niques, and methodologies employed but also discussed the
gaps in the three aforementioned categories. Besides, pro-
viding recommendations on how to get the benefits of TL
by carefully selecting transfer information relevant to specific
HAR challenges. For instance, while transferring knowledge
from recognizing walking to identifying running can enhance
performance, applying the same transfer to activities like
brushing teeth may yield poor results due to divergent contexts
and features. It is better to take into consideration matching the
complexity of activities with appropriate algorithms; simpler
models like AlexNet may suffice for routine tasks like walking,
while more complex activities like cooking, cleaning, and
intricate sports may necessitate deeper models like DenseNet.
In summary, our review shall serve as a guideline and refer-
ence for TL used in HAR with IMU data, aiming for more
effective models, and serves as a roadmap for future research,
highlighting the need to address the shortcomings mentioned
in the article such as the activities that have not classified yet
and limitation of TL algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ashry, T. Ogawa, and W. Gomaa, “CHARM-Deep: Continuous human
activity recognition model based on deep neural network using IMU
sensors of smartwatch,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 8757–8770,
Aug. 2020.
[2] F. Serpush, M. B. Menhaj, B. Masoumi, and B. Karasfi, “Wearable
sensor-based human activity recognition in the smart healthcare system,”
Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2022, pp. 1–31, Feb. 2022.
[3] K. K. Sahoo, R. Ghosh, S. Mallik, A. Roy, P. K. Singh, and Z. Zhao,
“Wrapper-based deep feature optimization for activity recognition in
the wearable sensor networks of healthcare systems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 965, Jan. 2023.
[4] S. Alghamdi, E. Fadel, and N. Alowidi, “Recognizing activities of
daily living using 1D convolutional neural networks for efficient smart
homes,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 313–323,
2021.
[5] B. Sherafat et al., “Automated methods for activity recognition of con-
struction workers and equipment: State-of-the-Art review,” J. Construct.
Eng. Manage., vol. 146, no. 6, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 03120002.
[6] R. K. Tripathi, A. S. Jalal, and S. C. Agrawal, “Suspicious human
activity recognition: A review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 50, no. 2,
pp. 283–339, Aug. 2018.
[7] M. Stojchevska, M. De Brouwer, M. Courteaux, F. Ongenae, and
S. Van Hoecke, “From lab to real world: Assessing the effectiveness of
human activity recognition and optimization through personalization,”
Sensors, vol. 23, no. 10, p. 4606, May 2023.
[8] Y.-C. Fan, Y.-H. Tseng, and C.-Y. Wen, “A novel deep neural network
method for HAR-based team training using body-worn inertial sensors,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 21, p. 8507, Nov. 2022.
[9] H. M. Gomes, M. Grzenda, R. Mello, J. Read, M. H. Le Nguyen, and
A. Bifet, “A survey on semi-supervised learning for delayed partially
labelled data streams,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1–42,
Apr. 2023.
[10] B. A. Mohammed Hashim and R. Amutha, “Deep transfer learning
based human activity recognition by transforming IMU data to image
domain using novel activity image creation method,” J. Intell. Fuzzy
Syst., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 2883–2890, Jul. 2022.
[11] A. Nouriani, R. McGovern, and R. Rajamani, “Activity recognition using
a high gain observer and spectrograms,” in Proc. Amer. Control Conf.
(ACC), May 2023, pp. 2246–2251.
[12] S. J. Pan, “Transfer learning,” Learning, vol. 21, pp. 1–2, Jan. 2020.
[13] C. H. Judd, “The relation of spatial intelligence,” Educ. Rev., vol. 36,
pp. 28–42, Jan. 1908.
[14] S. Kobayashi and T. Hasegawa, “Smartphone-based estimation of side-
walk surface type via deep learning,” Sensors Mater., vol. 33, no. 1,
p. 35, 2021.
[15] K. Yaguchi et al., “Human activity recognition using multi-input CNN
model with FFT spectrograms,” in Adjunct Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf.
Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput. Proc. ACM Int. Symp. Wearable Comput.,
Sep. 2020, pp. 364–367.
[16] M. Osman, “Positive transfer and negative transfer/antilearning of
problem-solving skills.,” J. Experim. Psychol., Gen., vol. 137, no. 1,
pp. 97–115, 2008.
[17] Z. Wang, Z. Dai, B. Póczos, and J. G. Carbonell, “Characterizing
and avoiding negative transfer,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2019, pp. 11293–11302.
[18] F. Zhuang et al., “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jul. 2020.
[19] N. Arya. (2022). Transfer Learning. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kdnuggets.com/2022/01/transfer-learning.html
[20] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2009.
[21] K. Weiss, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and D. Wang, “A survey of transfer
learning,” J. Big data, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–40, May 2016.
[22] M. Iman, H. R. Arabnia, and K. Rasheed, “A review of deep transfer
learning and recent advancements,” Technologies, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 40,
Mar. 2023.
[23] J. Yang, Y. Xu, H. Cao, H. Zou, and L. Xie, “Deep learning and
transfer learning for device-free human activity recognition: A survey,”
J. Automat. Intell., vol. 1, no. 1, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 100007.
[24] M. J. Page et al., “The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline
for reporting systematic reviews,” BMJ, vol. 372, p. 71, Mar. 2021.
[25] Y. Celik, M. F. Aslan, K. Sabanci, S. Stuart, W. L. Woo, and A. Godfrey,
“Improving inertial sensor-based activity recognition in neurological
populations,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 24, p. 9891, Dec. 2022.
[26] S. R. Taghanaki, M. Rainbow, and A. Etemad, “Self-supervised human
activity recognition with localized time-frequency contrastive repre-
sentation learning,” IEEE Trans. Hum.-Mach. Syst., vol. 53, no. 6,
pp. 1027–1037, Dec. 2023.
[27] N. Varshney, B. Bakariya, and A. K. S. Kushwaha, “Human activity
recognition using deep transfer learning of cross position sensor based
on vertical distribution of data,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 81, no. 16,
pp. 22307–22322, Jul. 2022.
[28] J. Li, P. Kang, T. Tan, and P. B. Shull, “Transfer learning improves
accelerometer-based child activity recognition via subject-independent
adult-domain adaption,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 26,
no. 5, pp. 2086–2095, May 2022.
[29] B. Ataseven, A. Madani, B. Semiz, and M. E. Gursoy, “Physical
activity recognition using deep transfer learning with convolutional
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Dependable, Autonomic
Secure Comput., Int. Conf. Pervasive Intel. Comput., Int. Conf. Cloud
Big Data Comput., Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr. (DASC/Pi-
Com/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Sep. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[30] M. D. Hssayeni, J. Jimenez-Shahed, M. A. Burack, and B. Ghoraani,
“Ensemble deep model for continuous estimation of unified Parkinson’s
disease rating scale III,” Biomed. Eng. OnLine, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–20,
Dec. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 11 ---
ASHRY et al.: TRANSFER LEARNING OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES BASED ON IMU SENSORS: A REVIEW 4125
[31] Z. Fu, X. He, E. Wang, J. Huo, J. Huang, and D. Wu, “Personalized
human activity recognition based on integrated wearable sensor and
transfer learning,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 3, p. 885, Jan. 2021.
[32] M. Kirchhof, L. Schmid, C. Reining, M. T. Hompel, and M. Pauly,
“Chances of interpretable transfer learning for human activity recogni-
tion in warehousing,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Logistics (ICCL),
Enschede, The Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Sep. 2021,
pp. 163–177.
[33] F. Xiao et al., “A deep learning method for complex human activity
recognition using virtual wearable sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Spatial
Data Intell. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2020, pp. 261–270.
[34] M. Graña, M. Aguilar-Moreno, J. De Lope Asiain, I. B. Araquistain,
and X. Garmendia, “Improved activity recognition combining inertial
motion sensors and electroencephalogram signals,” Int. J. Neural Syst.,
vol. 30, no. 10, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 2050053.
[35] S.-J. Wei, B. Zhang, X.-W. Tan, X.-G. Zhao, and D. Ye, “A real-time
human activity recognition approach with generalization performance,”
in Proc. 39th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), Jul. 2020, pp. 6334–6339.
[36] E. Garcia-Ceja, M. Riegler, A. K. Kvernberg, and J. Torresen, “User-
adaptive models for activity and emotion recognition using deep transfer
learning and data augmentation,” User Model. User-Adapted Interact.,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 365–393, Jul. 2020.
[37] M. Nutter, C. H. Crawford, and J. Ortiz, “Design of novel deep
learning models for real-time human activity recognition with mobile
phones,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Mar. 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[38] B. Chikhaoui, F. Gouineau, and M. Sotir, “A CNN based transfer
learning model for automatic activity recognition from accelerometer
sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Data Mining Pattern Recog-
nit., New York, NY, USA. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2018,
pp. 302–315.
[39] J. J. Dominguez Veiga, M. O’Reilly, D. Whelan, B. Caulfield,
and T. E. Ward, “Feature-free activity classification of inertial sen-
sor data with machine vision techniques: Method, development,
and evaluation,” JMIR mHealth uHealth, vol. 5, no. 8, p. e115,
Aug. 2017.
[40] W.-Y. Deng, Q.-H. Zheng, and Z.-M. Wang, “Cross-person activity
recognition using reduced kernel extreme learning machine,” Neural
Netw., vol. 53, pp. 1–7, May 2014.
[41] P. Kang, J. Li, B. Fan, S. Jiang, and P. B. Shull, “Wrist-worn hand ges-
ture recognition while walking via transfer learning,” IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Informat., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 952–961, Mar. 2022.
[42] N. Daniel and I. Klein, “INIM: Inertial images construction with
applications to activity recognition,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, p. 4787,
Jul. 2021.
[43] N. Maray, A. H. Ngu, J. Ni, M. Debnath, and L. Wang, “Transfer
learning on small datasets for improved fall detection,” Sensors, vol. 23,
no. 3, p. 1105, Jan. 2023.
[44] N. Naghavi and E. Wade, “Towards real-time prediction of freezing of
gait in patients with Parkinson’s disease: A novel deep one-class classi-
fier,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1726–1736,
Apr. 2022.
[45] J. Link, T. Perst, M. Stoeve, and B. M. Eskofier, “Wearable sensors
for activity recognition in ultimate frisbee using convolutional neural
networks and transfer learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 7, p. 2560,
Mar. 2022.
[46] M. Shang, Y. Zhang, A. Y. Ali Amer, I. D’Haeseleer, and B. Vanrumste,
“Bathroom activities monitoring for older adults by a wrist-mounted
accelerometer using a hybrid deep learning model,” in Proc. 43rd
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBC), Nov. 2021,
pp. 7112–7115.
[47] V. Farrahi, U. Muhammad, M. Rostami, and M. Oussalah, “AccNet24:
A deep learning framework for classifying 24-hour activity behaviours
from wrist-worn accelerometer data under free-living environments,” Int.
J. Med. Informat., vol. 172, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 105004.
[48] C. Drumm-Boyd. Activities of Daily Living. Accessed: Apr. 20, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.payingforseniorcare.com/activities-of-
daily-living
[49] Y. Cao, F. Li, H. Chen, X. Liu, S. Yang, and Y. Wang, “Leveraging
wearables for assisting the elderly with dementia in handwashing,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 6554–6570, 2022.
[50] Z. Hu, Y. Zhang, T. Yu, and S. Pan, “VMA: Domain Variance-
and modality-aware model transfer for fine-grained occupant activity
recognition,” in Proc. 21st ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Sensor
Netw. (IPSN), May 2022, pp. 259–270.
[51] L. Pei et al., “MARS: Mixed virtual and real wearable sensors for
human activity recognition with multidomain deep learning model,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 9383–9396, Jun. 2021.
[52] M. D. Schmidt, T. Glasmachers, and I. Iossifidis, “The concepts of
muscle activity generation driven by upper limb kinematics,” Biomed.
Eng. OnLine, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 63, Jun. 2023.
[53] S. K. Chaurasia and S. R. N. Reddy, “Impact of time domain features &
inertial sensors on activity recognition using randomized selection,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Commun., Intell. Syst. (ICCCIS), Feb. 2021,
pp. 744–750.
[54] K. Jun, “Human activity recognition using Fourier transform inspired
deep learning combination model,” Int. J. Sensors, Wireless Commun.
Control, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 16–31, Jul. 2019.
[55] S. Rosati, G. Balestra, and M. Knaflitz, “Comparison of different sets of
features for human activity recognition by wearable sensors,” Sensors,
vol. 18, no. 12, p. 4189, Nov. 2018.
[56] F. Cruciani et al., “Feature learning for human activity recognition using
convolutional neural networks: A case study for inertial measurement
unit and audio data,” CCF Trans. Pervasive Comput. Interact., vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 18–32, Mar. 2020.
[57] F. Li, K. Shirahama, M. A. Nisar, L. Köping, and M. Grzegorzek,
“Comparison of feature learning methods for human activity recog-
nition using wearable sensors,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 679,
Feb. 2018.
[58] Y. Tang, L. Zhang, F. Min, and J. He, “Multiscale deep feature learning
for human activity recognition using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 2106–2116, Feb. 2023.
[59] M. Kumar, P. Gautam, and V. B. Semwal, “Dimensionality reduction-
based discriminatory classification of human activity recognition using
machine learning,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Comput., Commun., Cyber-
Secur. (IC4S). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jul. 2022, pp. 581–593.
[60] M. Sassi, M. S. Haleem, and L. Pecchia, “Spectrogram-based approach
with convolutional neural network for human activity classification,”
in Proc. Medit. Conf. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2023, pp. 387–401.
[61] Y. Himeur et al., “Next-generation energy systems for sustainable smart
cities: Roles of transfer learning,” Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 85, Oct. 2022,
Art. no. 104059.
[62] G. Iglesias, E. Talavera, Á. González-Prieto, A. Mozo, and
S. Gómez-Canaval, “Data augmentation techniques in time series
domain: A survey and taxonomy,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 35, no. 14,
pp. 10123–10145, Mar. 2023.
[63] S.-I. Ao and H. Fayek, “Continual deep learning for time series
modeling,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 16, p. 7167, Aug. 2023.
[64] V. Hassija et al., “Interpreting black-box models: A review on explain-
able artificial intelligence,” Cognit. Comput., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 45–74,
Jan. 2024.
[65] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[66] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Z. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon,
“A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9,
no. 1, p. 2, Dec. 2020.
[67] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning:
A review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
[68] Mathwork. CNN-Based TL. Accessed: 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
www.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/ug/pretrained-convolutional-
neural-networks.html
[69] A. Antoniou, A. Storkey, and H. Edwards, “Data augmentation genera-
tive adversarial networks,” 2017, arXiv:1711.04340.
[70] C. Hou, “A study on IMU-based human activity recognition using
deep learning and traditional machine learning,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Comput. Commun. Syst. (ICCCS), May 2020, pp. 225–234.
[71] C. He, X. Li, Y. Xia, J. Tang, J. Yang, and Z. Ye, “Addressing the
overfitting in partial domain adaptation with self-training and contrastive
learning,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 1532–1545, Mar. 2024.
[72] P. Singhal, R. Walambe, S. Ramanna, and K. Kotecha, “Domain adap-
tation: Challenges, methods, datasets, and applications,” IEEE Access,
vol. 11, pp. 6973–7020, 2023.
[73] A. Rahate, R. Walambe, S. Ramanna, and K. Kotecha, “Multimodal
co-learning: Challenges, applications with datasets, recent advances and
future directions,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 81, pp. 203–239, May 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 12 ---
4126 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 25, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2025
[74] M. Zahangir Alom et al., “The history began from AlexNet: A compre-
hensive survey on deep learning approaches,” 2018, arXiv:1803.01164.
[75] W. Xu, Y.-L. Fu, and D. Zhu, “ResNet and its application to medical
image processing: Research progress and challenges,” Comput. Methods
Programs Biomed., vol. 240, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 107660.
[76] B. Espejo-Garcia, I. Malounas, N. Mylonas, A. Kasimati, and S. Fountas,
“Using EfficientNet and transfer learning for image-based diagnosis of
nutrient deficiencies,” Comput. Electron. Agricult., vol. 196, May 2022,
Art. no. 106868.
[77] N. S. Sanjay and A. Ahmadinia, “MobileNet-tiny: A deep neural
network-based real-time object detection for Rasberry pi,” in Proc. 18th
IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2019, pp. 647–652.
[78] M. A. Wakili et al., “Classification of breast cancer histopathological
images using DenseNet and transfer learning,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci.,
vol. 2022, pp. 1–31, Oct. 2022.
[79] P. Aswathy, Siddhartha, and D. Mishra, “Deep GoogLeNet features for
visual object tracking,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. Ind. Inf. Syst.
(ICIIS), Dec. 2018, pp. 60–66.
[80] Z. Xu. LSTM CHallenges. Accessed: Mar. 18, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://www.baeldung.com/cs/lstm-vanishing-gradient-
prevention#:~:text=While%20Long%20Short%2DTerm%20Memory,
their%20own%20set%20of%20challenges
[81] S. Sankaranarayanan, Y. Balaji, C. D. Castillo, and R. Chellappa, “Gen-
erate to adapt: Aligning domains using generative adversarial networks,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 8503–8512.
Sara Ashry received the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees from the CSE Department, Egypt-
Japan University of Science and Technology
(E-JUST), Alexandria, Egypt, in 2017 and 2020,
respectively.
She has held research fellowships at Waseda
University, Shinjuku, Japan, and Halmstad Uni-
versity, Halmstad, Sweden, in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. She was a Lecturer with Fayoum
University, Faiyum, Egypt. She is a Researcher
with the Electronic Research Institute (ERI),
Cairo, Egypt. She is a Researcher with the CoSy.Bio Institute, University
of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. Her research interests include human
activity recognition, deep learning, transfer learning, IMU sensors, the
Internet of Things (IoT), large language models (LLM), data engineering,
and review methodologies.
Supratim Das received the dual B.S. and M.Sc.
degrees from the Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research (IISER) Pune, Pune,
India, in June 2022. He is pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the CoSy.Bio Institute, Hamburg
University, Hamburg, Germany. His background
is in life sciences and data sciences. During
the M.Sc. thesis, he worked on genomic data
enhancement using deep learning.
He is currently working on physical activity
recognition using federated learning and transfer
learning. His research interests include the interdisciplinary areas of
biology, machine learning, federated learning, and physical activities.
Mahdie Rafiei received the M.Sc. degree in
computer science from QIAU, Qazvin, Iran,
in 2021. She is pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the CoSy.Bio Institute, Hamburg University,
Hamburg, Germany. Her master’s thesis focused
on the research of recommender systems using
machine learning techniques.
She is also working on a PhysioAI project
that aims to assess and enhance AI-powered
multimodal tools for measuring physical activity
in osteoarthritis treatment. She is particularly
interested in deep learning, transfer learning, and federated learning.
Throughout her studies, she worked for over five years in tech compa-
nies as a Web Developer.
Jan Baumbach received the Ph.D. degree
from Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany,
in 2008.
He has been the Chair of Experimental
Bioinformatics with the Technical University
of Munich, Munich, Germany; a Research
Group Leader with the Max Planck Institute
for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany; and a
Postdoctoral Fellow with the Algorithms Group
of Richard Karp, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. He is the Director
of the CoSy.Bio Institute, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany,
since January 2021. Part-time, he is also leading the Computa-
tional Biomedicine Group, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark. His research interests include computational biology, big data
analytics, and machine learning.
Linda Baumbach received the M.Sc. degree
in physiotherapy and the Ph.D. degree in
health science from the University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark, in 2015 and 2020,
respectively.
She was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Univer-
sity Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE),
Hamburg, Germany. She is currently a Scientific
Researcher with the Center of Bioinformat-
ics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg. She is
a distinguished professional in health science,
physiotherapy, and physical activities. Her research interests include the
treatment of knee osteoarthritis in primary care and recognizing physical
human activities. With a strong academic foundation including system-
atic review methodologies, she is dedicated to advancing healthcare
practices.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Seoul National Univ of Science & Tech (SNUT). Downloaded on May 26,2026 at 11:24:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 13 ---
