
--- PAGE 1 ---
Academic Editors: Tao Liu, Eros
Pasero and Vincenzo Randazzo
Received: 24 September 2024
Revised: 21 December 2024
Accepted: 2 January 2025
Published: 5 January 2025
Citation: Palazzo, L.; Suglia, V.;
Grieco, S.; Buongiorno, D.; Brunetti,
A.; Carnimeo, L.; Amitrano, F.; Coccia,
A.; Pagano, G.; D’Addio, G.; et al. A
Deep Learning-Based Framework
Oriented to Pathological Gait
Recognition with Inertial Sensors.
Sensors 2025, 25, 260. https://
doi.org/10.3390/s25010260
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
A Deep Learning-Based Framework Oriented to Pathological
Gait Recognition with Inertial Sensors
Lucia Palazzo 1,2,† , Vladimiro Suglia 2,† , Sabrina Grieco 2 , Domenico Buongiorno 2 , Antonio Brunetti 2 ,
Leonarda Carnimeo 2 , Federica Amitrano 3 , Armando Coccia 3 , Gaetano Pagano 1,* , Giovanni D’Addio 1,3
and Vitoantonio Bevilacqua 2
1 Bioengineering Unit of Bari, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri IRCCS, Via Generale Bellomo, 73/75,
70124 Bari, Italy; lucia.palazzo@icsmaugeri.it (L.P.); gianni.daddio@icsmaugeri.it (G.D.)
2 Department of Electrical and Information Engineering (DEI), Polytechnic University of Bari,
Via E. Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy; vladimiro.suglia@poliba.it (V.S.); s.grieco1@studenti.poliba.it (S.G.);
domenico.buongiorno@poliba.it (D.B.); antonio.brunetti@poliba.it (A.B.); leonarda.carnimeo@poliba.it (L.C.);
vitoantonio.bevilacqua@poliba.it (V.B.)
3 Bioengineering Unit of Telese Terme, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri IRCCS, Via Bagni Vecchi, 1,
82037 Telese Terme, Italy; federica.amitrano@icsmaugeri.it (F.A.); armando.coccia@icsmaugeri.it (A.C.)
* Correspondence: gaetano.pagano@icsmaugeri.it
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Abnormal locomotor patterns may occur in case of either motor damages or
neurological conditions, thus potentially jeopardizing an individual’s safety. Pathological
gait recognition (PGR) is a research field that aims to discriminate among different walking
patterns. A PGR-oriented system may benefit from the simulation of gait disorders by
healthy subjects, since the acquisition of actual pathological gaits would require either
a higher experimental time or a larger sample size. Only a few works have exploited
abnormal walking patterns, emulated by unimpaired individuals, to perform PGR with
Deep Learning-based models. In this article, the authors present a workflow based on
convolutional neural networks to recognize normal and pathological locomotor behaviors
by means of inertial data related to nineteen healthy subjects. Although this is a preliminary
feasibility study, its promising performance in terms of accuracy and computational time
pave the way for a more realistic validation on actual pathological data. In light of this,
classification outcomes could support clinicians in the early detection of gait disorders and
the tracking of rehabilitation advances in real time.
Keywords: gait recognition; gait disorders; inertial measurement units; deep learning;
convolutional neural network; rehabilitation; bioengineering
1. Introduction
Human locomotion is a symmetric motor action [1] that requires the involvement of
the central and peripheral nervous systems actuating mechanisms to control limb move-
ments, posture, and muscle tone. When this neuromotor process is compromised by either
physiological decline due to aging or such pathological conditions as Parkinson’s disease
(PD), abnormal walking patterns may be exhibited [2]. Therefore, monitoring locomotor
behaviors is needed to evaluate whether and how an individuals’ motor state deviates from
a healthy gait [3], and such difference may be an indicator of a gait disorder [4,5].
In the context of healthcare, the employment of systems for monitoring and recogniz-
ing gait allows one to record motor execution, identify a possible gait disorder, and provide
feedback for the patients’ assistance [6–10]. In light of this, walking pattern recognition
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 https://doi.org/10.3390/s25010260

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 2 of 17
even has the potential to support clinicians for both rehabilitative and remote-monitoring
purposes [11], aiming at the treatment of neuromotor pathologies, such as PD [12–16],
cerebellar ataxia [17], stroke [18,19], and cerebral palsy [20].
Gait recognition (GR) is a human activity recognition problem that is directed to
differentiate locomotion from other motor actions [3], whilst pathological gait recognition
(PGR) may be regarded as a subfield of GR that is used to discriminate motor patterns
between healthy and pathological ones in case of binary classification [4] or among different
gait disorders [2,6,11,21–24]. Despite a binary classification being easier to accomplish due
to the high deviation of pathological motor patterns with respect to normal gait [13,15,18],
a PGR including different gait disorders allows one to discriminate even similar walking
patterns [5], such as those of foot drop and hemiplegia.
The recognition of pathological gaits needs a large amount of data related to patients
to be accurate, which implies that one needs to make the experimental subjects execute mul-
tiple repetitions of several motor actions [1,3]. However, this may be a highly demanding
motor task in the case of actually impaired subjects due to their condition; for this reason,
such individuals could perform the target motor pattern only a limited number of times
or with longer breaks [9]. As a consequence, a dataset imbalance between healthy and
pathological individuals would arise, thus introducing a bias in the classification; since this
worsens the performance of automatic recognition, a higher number of patients needs to be
involved [25]. Moreover, the specific disease severity influences the number of recruitable
patients, which could be seriously restricted in the case of non-autonomous locomotion,
and a constant supervision of clinicians is still required for the patients’ safety. Hence, the
simulation of abnormal walking patterns by healthy individuals may provide a benefit to
the performance of a PGR framework, considering their possibility to perform different
trials of various walking actions. In so doing, the effectiveness of a classification pipeline
can be evaluated prior to any investigations on actual pathological individuals [2]; this
is similar to the concept of cross-subject domain adaptation [26], meaning that the model
is pre-trained on abnormal walking patterns simulated by healthy controls before being
finally tested on actual pathological data. Additionally, the PGR system could then carry
out an early detection of abnormal walking patterns [5,27].
A pathological motor pattern may be replicated in different ways, such as fixing lower
limb joints [4] or making the subject wear a shoe unilaterally [8]; however, such method-
ology could result in the individual’s discomfort during the execution, thus potentially
leading to involuntary compensations that alter the simulation, and would require a com-
plex setup to mimic various gait disorders. Therefore, experimental protocols addressing
PGR are typically based on the simulation of such impaired motor behaviors without any
physical constraint on the lower limbs [2,7,21].
A few studies trained artificial intelligence (AI) models, notably Deep Learning (DL)
architectures, with inertial data regarding emulated gait disorder. Hence, a paucity in the
literature has been found about the frameworks exploiting the simulation of abnormal
walking patterns to train DL-based models for the final aim of recognizing actual patholog-
ical gaits. The objective of this work is to present the evaluation of CNN-based algorithms
that aim to discriminate normal gait from abnormal human walking patterns, which are
emulated by healthy subjects, by means of inertial data. Both the execution of normal gait
and the simulation of multiple pathological behaviors are included in the experimental
protocol. In addition, various sensor configurations (number and placement of IMUs)
have been evaluated to estimate their impact on the model performance; their comparison
has been analyzed to determine the proper tradeoff between the informativeness and the
usability of the sensor placement for the sake of continuous usage oriented to clinical
purposes entailing both remote monitoring and rehabilitation [3,7].

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 3 of 17
The remainder of this article is as follows. After reporting the state-of-the-art in
Section 2, materials (i.e., the system and protocol for data collection) and methods (i.e.,
preprocessing operations, CNN-based architectures, and statistical analysis) are discussed
in Section 3. Then, the results are shown and discussed in Section 4. Ultimately, in
Section 5 conclusions about the conducted study are drawn and suggestions for future
works are reported.
2. Related Works
Walking patterns for PGR can be recorded by means of such fixed sensors as opti-
cal motion capture systems [6], which provide experimenters with high-fidelity data on
movement patterns during the gait cycle [28]. Among these devices, RGBD cameras have
obtained comparable performance with respect to Vicon systems [6], which have a limited
application due to their expensiveness [4]. RGBD cameras recognized activities of daily
living (ADLs) with performances that were similar to or even higher than inertial wearable
devices [29]. However, these devices are influenced by illumination and occlusions and
are characterized by a limited coverage area [30]; in addition, their need for extensive
preprocessing to prepare data for the actual classification pipeline [6] could be in contrast
with real-time requirements of remote-monitoring applications [3]. Hence, such wearable
sensors as inertial measurement units (IMUs) could be preferred for their portability, which
allows for their usage in both outdoor and indoor environments [3,11].
Subsequently, motor behaviors can be recognized by Machine Learning (ML) models,
which were trained on data related to either actual pathological individuals or locomotor
disorders simulated by healthy subjects. For instance, Dolatabadi et al. [25] fed such
ML models as a k-nearest neighbor (kNN) with the data coming from Kinect sensors to
automatically discriminate the walking patterns of healthy subjects and individuals affected
by either stroke or acquired brain injury. Ghobadi [7] trained a support vector machine
(SVM) with IMU data to recognize a simulated foot drop behavior.
Notwithstanding, these pipelines needed a complex and time-demanding feature
engineering stage prior to the actual classification [3,8]. On the other hand, Deep Learn-
ing (DL) architectures, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6,9,31], can be
trained directly on raw data, thus avoiding manual feature extraction [3,21]. For instance,
Oh et al. [9] exploited a 1D-CNN to recognize the activities of daily living performed by
hemiparetic stroke patients and healthy controls, who wore IMUs on the wrist, forearm,
upper arm, trunk, and ankle. However, such ADLs did not entail locomotor patterns, since
they were conceived for investigating the asymmetry of upper limb motions of individuals
after a stroke.
There exist a few studies that simulate pathological walking patterns to train PGR-
oriented AI algorithms, whether ML or DL models, by acquiring inertial data. For instance,
Robles et al. [2] utilized Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) to classify simulated gait
disorders (those of Parkinsonian, ataxic, and hemiplegic origins)by analyzing accelerations
of the center of mass of healthy subjects. Ghobadi et al. [7] discriminated normal gait
from mimicked foot drop (FD) by training a support vector machine (SVM) with the data
coming from a single IMU placed on the subject’s right leg. Yin et al. [23] exploited two
accelerometers to feed DL architectures, such as a CNN, with the aim of automatically
classifying pathological gaits (e.g., hemiplegic, diplegic, and Parkinsonian gaits), which
were emulated by healthy participants.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 4 of 17
3. Materials and Methods
The proposed framework for pathological gait recognition is reported in Figure 1.
Herein, inertial data are first collected from five sensors placed on the human body during
the execution of walking patterns, and then used to feed each of three DL-based classifiers,
which differ in terms of architecture.
Figure 1. The presented framework is based on the acquisition of inertial data by means of five IMU
sensors, whose components are given as input to each of three DL-based models, which return the
label associated with the walking pattern.
3.1. Data Collection
Thissectionreportstheindividualsrecruitedintheexperiments, thewalkingbehaviors
that were simulated, the IMU sensors used to acquire kinematic data, and the experimental
protocol that was followed.
3.1.1. Participants
Nineteen healthy subjects were recruited among the physiatrists and physiotherapists
of IRCCS Maugeri (Bari, Italy) to guarantee a plausible simulation of pathological gaits.
Proper balancing among males and females was guaranteed (i.e., 9 males and 10 females)
to prevent the model from being biased by sex [31]. These participants have no motor or
cognitive disorders, and differ in age (37.6 ±13.0 years old), weight (72.9 ±12.7 kg), height
(170.7±6.8cm), andanthropometriccharacteristicsforthesakeofhigherdataheterogeneity.
Prior to the beginning of the experimental session, participants were informed about the
execution of the motor tasks.
3.1.2. Walking Actions
The activities to be performed were chosen among the motor disorders that had been
treated the most in the IRCCS Maugeri in Bari, Italy. In light of this, in addition to normal
walking, four pathological gaits were considered and they are ataxic, equine (foot drop),
hemiplegic, and Parkinsonian gaits [32]. The description of these walking patterns is
provided in the following.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 5 of 17
- Normal gait mainly requires alternating flexion–extension movements of the lower
limb joints (i.e., hip, knee, and ankle), possibly supported by arm swinging to
increase balance.
- Hemiplegic gait is the result of poor control of the flexor muscles during the swing
phase, as well as spasticity of the extensor muscles involved in the extension of the
paretic leg [2]. The knee does not flex normally during swinging, thus causing the leg
circumduction [28]. On the paretic side, the hemiplegic patient is prone to raise the
shoulder and to keep the arm close to the trunk, flexed, adducted, and with the wrist
internally rotated.
- Equine gait (foot drop) can be induced by abnormal activity of the plantar muscles
in the swing phase, thus resulting in weakness in foot dorsiflexion and an abnormal
ankle position for which knee flexion or hyperextension during the stance phase of
locomotion are used as compensation [33].
- Ataxic-cerebellar gait is characterized by a wide base of support and a low cadence of
steps that leads to impaired balance and generates instability [2].
- Parkinsonian gait determines the presence of bradykinesia (delayed movement) with
short and slow steps, as well as issues in detaching the forefoot [2,34]. Parkinsonian
patients even have a forward flexed trunk because of muscle rigidity in this body part
and tremors in the hands [31].
3.1.3. IMU Sensors
Wearable IMU sensors (OPALTM, APDM Inc., Portland, OR, USA) were utilized to
acquire data from each subject. These devices are automatically calibrated by the Motion
Studio system by APDM and are worn by means of elastic bands as Velcro straps to avoid
direct contact with the skin and consequent motion artifacts due to friction. Five sensors
were selected (see Figure 1) and worn by each participant on both sides of the human
pelvis (RP and LP), on the right and left wrists (RW and LW), and on the sternum (S). This
distributed placement has been preferred with respect to the tendency by many PGR studies
to promote the subject’s comfort in daily life by exploiting the potentiality of e-textiles [35]:
more specifically, the sensor on the sternum can be embedded into a smart T-shirt, those on
the wrists can be part of a smart bracelet, and those on the pelvis might be inserted in a
smart belt. In addition, placing sensors on different body parts is useful to detect a wider
myriad of motor actions that involve the upper and lower limbs, whether separately or
simultaneously [3,36].
The sensor configuration is almost the same as in a previous work about human
activity recognition [3], with the only difference being an additional IMU on the left
wrist. Furthermore, this placement enables the detection of pathological behaviors: in
fact, the IMUs on the pelvis may reveal the lower limb movements compensating for
either hemiplegia or foot drop; on the other hand, the sensor on the sternum allows one
to detect Parkinsonian trunk flexion; sensors on the wrists are essential to record the
presence/absence of arm movements corresponding to the dominant and/or pathological
side (hemiplegia), or the presence of Parkinson tremor. This sensor placement can capture
the characteristics of a normal gait too, as already mentioned in a previous work [3].
The experimental data were recorded with a sampling rate of 128 Hz from a 3-axis
14-bit accelerometer to measure linear acceleration, a 3-axis 16-bit gyroscope to acquire
angular velocity, and a 3-axis 16-bit magnetometer for magnetic field intensity [37].
3.1.4. Experimental Protocol
The protocol took place at the Laboratory of Movement Analysis of IRCCS Maugeri in
Bari, Italy; it encompassed the execution of multiple repetitions of both normal locomotion

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 6 of 17
and the simulation of pathological gaits, meaning that each subject was asked to perform
four repetitions for each task. The mimicking quality was qualitatively ensured by a
prior familiarization stage, whose duration was not excessively high since physiatrists
and physiotherapists executed the tasks. In addition, verisimilitude was further allowed
by an expert in the realm of neurorehabilitation, who gave instructions in a video that
was taken as a further reference together with the Standford Medicine guidelines [38]. A
total of 28 repetitions were recorded for each subject, since hemiplegic and equine gaits
were mimicked on each side of the human body to increase the model’s generalizability in
recognizing the pathology. In fact, in these cases the asymmetry of motor patterns can be
relevant not only for activity classification, but also for effective rehabilitation [9].
Each repetition began with a standing phase of 15 s, proceeded with overground
walking on a linear traced path of 7 m, and ended with another standing stage of 5 s, as
shown in Figure 1. Note that this path was followed in different directions for the sake of
greater data variability. Each subject was told to wait a reasonable time between contiguous
repetitions to prevent fatigue [3]. In view of this, the protocol required a total of almost
45 min for each individual.
3.2. Classification Pipeline
The pipeline for classifying walking patterns is made up of two parts, which are a
preliminary set of preprocessing operations and the implementation of different models
for PGR.
3.2.1. Preprocessing
Data from the inertial sensors were initially acquired for each subject and repetition as
a matrix of size Ns × (5 ·9), where Ns is the number of samples in a single repetition, 5 is
the total number of IMU sensors, and 9 is the total number of IMU components (3 for the
accelerometer, 3 for the gyroscope, and 3 for the magnetometer). Afterwards, they were
processed first with segmentation by visual inspection to exclude both the static period
(initial and final standing phases) and the transitional movements (stand-to-walk, walking,
and walk-to-stand), isolating the walking patterns of interest.
Accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer values were then normalized for each
walking pattern in the range [−1,1] to obtain a uniform representation of the data [3].
Subsequently, a windowing procedure was applied to enlarge the dataset dimensionality
by dividing the signal into windows of 128 samples (1 s) with 50% overlap (0.5 s); this
window width was chosen so as to capture enough motor patterns without excessively
increasing the computational cost [39].
IMU data were resampled both to achieve a uniform sample size and to exploit the
whole informative content of the signal [3]. Additionally, the authors examined different
combinations of sensors to verify the influence of sensor configurations on the classification
performance [3].
3.2.2. Classification Models
In this work, the pipeline for classifying normal and abnormal walking patterns
includes three DL-based models:
1. mCNN-1D: a multi-branch one-dimensional convolutional neural network that was
already exploited for continuous HAR in a previous work [3];
2. smCNN-1D: a simplified multi-branch one-dimensional convolutional neural network;
3. sCNN-1D: a sequential one-dimensional convolutional neural network.
The authors chose CNN-based architectures in view of their successful application in
related works about PGR [22–24], together with their efficacy in HAR [3,40].

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 7 of 17
The mCNN-1D model (Figure 2a) is characterized by the same architecture and hyper
parameters as the one used in the previous work [3], with the only difference that the
early-stop criterion herein monitors the recall on the validation set to avoid overfitting.
The smCNN-1D model (Figure 2b) differs from mCNN-1D model from the architec-
tural point of view, since it adopts only one 1D convolutional layer, which uses 128 filters
with a kernel size of 5, and one fully connected layer with 128 neurons; moreover, the hyper
parameters are the same, except for the batch size of 256.
The sCNN-1D architecture (Figure 2c) is inspired by that of the smCNN-1D model.
Since it is a sequential CNN, it is not made up of parallel branches, but only of a unique
set of layers. Therefore, input data are not split into the different IMU channels (i.e.,
accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer); on the other hand, such IMU components
can be given as input to the model either combined or separately.
Conv1D
Max Pooling
Flatten
Dense
Softmax
Input Layer
Output
128
2
Concatenate
128
3
64
5
2
64
3
WH WF WA WN
2
128
3
2
64
3
128
5
2
128
3
2
64
3
0 .2
128 128
Dropout
Acc Gyr Mag
128
5
128
5
64
5
64
5
WP
2 2
128
2
0 .2
128
Acc Gyr Mag
128
128
WP
5 5 5
2
0 .2
128
Input
128
5
WH
WF
WA
WN
WP
WH
WF
WA
WN
a)
b) c)
Wl
Wl
Wl
Wl
Wl
Wl
Wl
N
c h
N
c h
N
c h
N
c h
N
c h
N
c h
Nw
N
c h
Nw
Nw
Nw
Nw
Nw
Nw
Figure 2. The classification models addressing PGR: (a) a multi-branch one-dimensional convolu-
tional neural network; (b) a simplified multi-branch one-dimensional convolutional neural network;
(c) a sequential one-dimensional convolutional neural network. Note that Nw is the number of win-
dows in the input dataset, which differs with both subjects and trials; Wl is the window length, which
is fixed; and Nch is the number of sensor channels.
For all architectures, to aggregate the data from multiple sensors into one single input,
the input layer is fed by a multidimensional array whose shape is (Nw,Wl, Nch), where
Nw is the number of windows in the input dataset, which may change across subjects and

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 8 of 17
trials; Wl is the window length, which is fixed; and Nch is the number of sensor channels,
which is equal to the quantity Nc · Ns, given Ns the number of sensors in the combination
to be evaluated and Nc the number of IMU components to be examined. Note that Nc can
be one for the sCNN-1D when only a single IMU component is used as input to the model;
otherwise, it is three.
The classification was designed to recognize five walking patterns, since both hemi-
plegic and equine walks have not been distinguished based on the affected side.
The data splitting method is the same across all models: the dataset is randomly split
across subjects [41,42] such that the data from 60% of them (11 subjects) are assigned to the
training set, the data from 20% of them (4 different subjects) to the validation set, and the
data from the other 20% (a different 4 subjects) to the testing set. This splitting strategy has
already been employed in other studies that are oriented to fall detection [43] and human
activity recognition [44], as well as conceived for diagnostic purposes in either the medical
field [45,46] or the energetic context [47]. To ensure a fair and unbiased evaluation of each
model, the above-mentioned partition is applied ten times and the dataset is split ten times,
in each of which different subjects are randomly extracted to constitute the three sets [3,48].
All investigations of the models were conducted on the Google Colab-Pro framework
such that each model was trained on a Tesla T4. All the architectures were trained and
made inferences by means of Tensorflow, Sklearn, Pandas, and Numpy libraries.
3.3. Metrics and Statistics
Different metrics were used to evaluate the model performance for each sensor combi-
nation reported in Figure 3. At first, the test dataset was evaluated in terms of accuracy
and recall, whose formulas are reported as follows.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(1)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2)
where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent true positives, true negatives, false positives, and
false negatives, respectively.
S
LP
RP
LW
RW
1 sensor 2 sensors 3 sensors 4 sensors 5 sensors
S + LP
S + RP
S + LW
S + RW
LP + RP
LP + LW
LP + RW
RP + LW
RP + RW
LW + RW
S + LP + RP
S + LP + LW
S + LP + RW
S + RP + LW
S + RP + RW
S + LW + RW
LP + RP + LW
LP + RP + RW
LP + LW + RW
RP + LW + RW
S + LP + RP + LW
S + LP + RP + RW
S + LP + LW + RW
S + RP + LW + RW
LP + RP + LW + RW
S + LP + RP + LW + RW
Figure 3. Sensor combinations grouped by the number of sensors, which can be placed at the sternum
(S), the left pelvis (LP), the right pelvis (RP), the left wrist (LW), and the right wrist (RW).

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 9 of 17
On the other hand, the feasibility of the framework in real-time clinical application
was investigated by computing the inference time, which is the instant when the data are
given as input to the model in which the result classification label is obtained [49].
The normality distribution of these indexes was checked by means of a Shapiro–
Wilk test with a significance level of p = 0.05. Consequently, for pair-wise comparisons,
their values were statistically compared through a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank
test for non-normally distributed sets and with a paired t-test (p < 0.05) for normally
distributed ones.
These analyses were conducted using the Matlab 2022b platform.
4. Results and Discussion
In this work, the authors present a framework based on Deep Learning, aiming to
perform pathological gait recognition (PGR)—i.e., recognizing healthy and simulated
pathological gaits. For this purpose, various architectures based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been implemented, and they are a multi-branch one-dimensional
CNN (mCNN-1D), a simplified multi-branch one-dimensional CNN (smCNN-1D), and a
sequential one-dimensional CNN (sCNN-1D). Such models have been trained and tested
with the data coming from inertial measurement units (IMUs) placed at five body parts,
which are the left pelvis (LP), the right pelvis (RP), the left wrist (LW), the right wrist
(RW), and the sternum (S). The experimental protocol followed by the subjects entails
both the execution of normal gait (WN) and the simulation of four abnormal walking
patterns, which are hemiplegic (WH), equine (WF), ataxic (WA), and Parkinsonian (WP)
gaits. Three indexes have been employed to evaluate the performance of the proposed
workflow: accuracy and recall aim to ascertain the capability to perform PGR, whilst
inference time serves to assess its feasibility in a real-time clinical scenario. Note that the
classification speed is needed to ensure prompt assistance to any patients; for instance,
when they are assisted by a robotic device, the supporting torque provided by the controller
should be properly tailored to their disorder [50–56], which is the one recognized by the
classifier. Furthermore, since the self-detection of gait patterns may be difficult, a real-time
classification allows for correcting abnormal behaviors [34] or adapting to the patient
improvements [36] that would occur during a rehabilitation program. The model is tested
for different sensor combinations to establish the optimal configuration in light of the
given metrics.
The radar plots reported in Figure 4 compare the results of the mCNN-1D and smCNN-
1D architectures, each of which is fed with all three components of the IMU sensors
(accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer).
The median of accuracy and recall for the two models is 100% in almost all sensor
configurations, despite the dataset imbalance. This could be due to the fact that applying
segmentation before normalization allows for the exclusion of all possible motion artifacts
that would worsen the classification performance. However, as for the mCNN-1D model,
such satisfying results in terms of accuracy are not accompanied by an equally acceptable
inference time, since its value approaches 600 ± 100 ms for some combinations, which can
be excessive for a real-time application, since it is close to 30% of the execution time of
overground walking by impaired subjects [57].
Consequently, the model architecture has been simplified, thus reaching with the
smCNN-1D model a test inference time that is significantly lower than the one of the
mCNN-1D model in almost all combinations; in addition, the maximum time decreases
from approximately 700 ms to about 400 ms for the LP+LW and S+LP+RW sensor pairs.
This computational time is even lower than 300 ms for some combinations with either a
single IMU or sensor pairs for the simplified multi-branch CNN.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 10 of 17
Figure 4. Radar plot comparing metrics computed on the test set for the multi-branch CNN and its
simplified version, with *, ** and *** representing statistically significant comparisons with p < 0.05,
p < 0.01, and p < 0.001, respectively.
In light of this, the simplified architecture was adopted for the sequential CNN
(Figure 2c) as well. The performance achieved with the smCNN-1D and sCNN-1D models,
whose input data are the three channels of the IMU sensors, are pictorially depicted in
Figure 5.
Figure 5. Radar plot comparing metrics computed on the test set for the simplified multi-branch
and the sequential CNNs, with *, **, and *** representing statistically significant comparisons with
p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.001, respectively.
For parity of accuracy and recall, the inference time does not seem to improve when
passing from the smCNN-1D to the sCNN-1D model, except for the sensor on the sternum,
in which case the test inference time is about 100 ms. This is presumably due to the use
of unnecessary input data; therefore, the sCNN-1D model has been tested for all sensor
combinations by separately giving as input each IMU component to the model, with the
aim of evaluating which channel (i.e., accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer) leads
to the best model performance. The consequent results in terms of accuracy, recall, and
inference time are pictorially shown with the radar plots reported in Figure 6.
The outcomes show better performance in both accuracy and recall for the accelerome-
ter and gyroscope, whereas the outcome worsens when passing the magnetometer entry as
input to the model, since the recall is about 80% only in three combinations (i.e., S+LW+RW,
S+LP+LW+RW, S+RP+LW+RW). Moreover, the lowest values of accuracy are achieved for
the combinations with one sensor placed at either the sternum or the right pelvis; instead,
the accuracy for the LW+RW pair is higher than the one related to the LP+RP pair. Hence, it
can be argued that the information carried by the magnetometer placed on the wrist raises

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 11 of 17
the performance with respect to the magnetometers of the IMU located at the sternum
and pelvis, which are not equally discriminative. In fact, the motor behavior of human
wrists is different for each type of walking action: it is stationary on the affected side in the
hemiplegic gait close to the sternum, and it follows hand tremors in the Parkinsonian gait
and arm sway in normal walking.
Figure 6. Radar plot of the accuracy, recall, and inference time computed on the test set by feeding
the sequential CNN with each IMU component separately.
The outcome of the above-mentioned model in terms of inference time lies in the
range of [100,200] ms for almost all the three components, except for some combinations
in which it slightly exceeds 200 ms in the case of the accelerometer and gyroscope. This
outcome is more compliant to real-time requirements, since it at most equals 10% of the
execution time of pathological walking [57]. Therefore, the sequential CNN model using
either the accelerometer or the gyroscope seems to provide the best compromise among all
the above-mentioned metrics.
Figure 7 and Table 1 report the average accuracy in distinguishing normal and simu-
lated pathological gaits to compare the proposed framework with similar studies in the
literature: all walking patterns have been classified with an average accuracy of 100%, thus
outperforming related works.
For instance, Robles et al. [2] utilized Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) to classify
simulated gait disorders (Parkinsonian, ataxic, and hemiplegic gaits) by analyzing accelera-
tions of the center of mass of ten healthy subjects. An average accuracy of 99.8%, 90.3%,
97.3%, and 98.1% was obtained for the classification of normal, hemiplegic, ataxic, and
Parkinsonian gaits, respectively. Ghobadi et al. [7] discriminated normal gait from foot
drop (FD) patterns, which were mimicked by ten healthy subjects, with an average accuracy
of 99.6% and 98.7% (respectively) by training an SVM with Mahalanobis distance-based
features extracted from the IMU signals of the subject’s right leg. Esfahani et al. [11]
employed various ML-based algorithms (e.g., ANNs, SVM, and kNN), which were fed
with the data of eleven healthy subjects coming from a smart textile system, thus being able
to differentiate between normal and hemiplegic gaits with an average accuracy of 99.6%
and 99.4%, respectively.
However, such studies performed the actual classification after a time-consuming
feature engineering procedure. On the other hand, other related works relied upon DL
architectures to automatically extract features instead of handcrafting them [58]. For
example, Guo et al. [6] exploited not only SVM, but also Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory (BiLSTM) networks to classify normal and mimicked foot drop walking patterns
based on the images acquired with a single RGB-D camera; in so doing, average accuracies
of 81.24% and 92.9% were, respectively, achieved for the normal and the pathological

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 12 of 17
gaits, which were simulated by sixteen healthy subjects. Albuquerque et al. [24] recruited
twenty-one healthy subjects and developed a remote pathological gait classification system
for discriminating normal, hemiplegic, foot drop, and Parkinsonian gaits, thus achieving
average accuracies of 99%, 89%, 97%, and 95%, respectively. The performance of these
two works is almost comparable with our study except for the recognition of one class
(i.e., normal and hemiplegic gait, respectively), which is mainly confused with similar
walking patterns that are not fit within the focus of our study. Verlekar et al. [22] trained
CNN-based models with gait energy images, which were determined from a dataset of five
healthy subjects; in so doing, it was possible to distinguish normal from hemiplegic, foot
drop, and Parkinsonian gait sequences with an average accuracy of 94%, 87%, 94%, and
98%, respectively. In spite of these outcomes, in their mind the extracted features do not
perfectly suit the field of gait classification, which may explain misclassifications between
similar walking patterns (e.g., foot drop and hemiplegia).
2019 2022 2024
85
90
95
100
Guo et al. Verlekar et al. Esfahani et al. Yin et al. Proposed pipeline
% Accuracy
Year
Albuquerque et al.
2021
80
2017
Ghobadi et al. Robles et al.
Sample size
5
10
21
1
Recognition System
Deep Learning Machine Learning
Walking patterns
Normal Hemiplegia Ataxia Foot drop Parkinsonian
Acquisition System
Optical devices Inertial sensors
Figure 7. Related works simulating abnormal walking patterns [2,6,7,11,22–24].
Table 1. Relevant features from related works, reported for comparisons among workflows.
Ghobadi et al.
[7]
Verlekar et al.
[22]
Eshefani et al.
[11]
Guo et al.
[6]
Yin et al.
[23]
Albuquerque et al.
[24]
Robles et al.
[2]
Proposed
Framework
Subjects 10 5 11 16 15 21 10 19
Input
data
IMU
signals
Data
from
images
Data from
smart
textiles
Data
from
images
IMU
signals
Data
from
images
Data
from
accelerometer
IMU
signals
Classifier
type
ML DL ML
ML
DL
DL DL ML DL
Classifier SVM CNN
kNN,
LDA,
SVM,
ANN
SVM
BiLSTM
ANN,
LSTM,
CNN
CNN ANN CNN
Normal 99.6% 94.0% 99.6% 81.24% 89.0% 99.0% 99.8% 100%
Hemiplegia ND 87% 99.4% ND 91.3% 89.0% 90.3% 100%
Ataxia ND ND ND ND ND ND 97.0% 100%
Foot
drop
98.7% 94.0% ND 92.9% ND 97.0% ND 100%
Parkinsonian ND 98.0% ND ND 78.6% 95.0% 98.1% 100%

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 13 of 17
Moreover, these latter studies addressed PGR with data coming from optical trackers,
which may be limited in real-world scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, only one
work has employed IMU data to recognize simulated pathological gaits by means of DL
architectures. Yin et al. [23] utilized two accelerometers mounted on the lower limbs
to classify normal and simulated pathological gaits through both ML (i.e., ANN) and
DL models (LSTM and CNN); in so doing, normal, hemiplegic, and Parkinsonian motor
patterns were discriminated with average accuracies of 89%, 91.3%, and 78.6%, respectively.
Despite the promising performances, they are yet lessened by the proposed workflow,
arguably due to the order of preprocessing operations (i.e., normalizing signals before
segmenting), which may introduce motion artifacts worsening classification performance;
in addition, that investigation was conducted on a lower sample size (i.e., number of
participants) with the same sensor type (i.e., inertial measurement units) and did not
consider the same walking patterns as the authors’ work.
5. Conclusions
This work presents a Deep Learning-based framework aimed at the classification
of normal and abnormal walking patterns by means of multiple convolutional neural
networks, which are fed with the data coming from inertial sensors worn at different
locations of the human body.
Given the promising performance of the models used in terms of accuracy and infer-
ence time, the authors claim the effectiveness of the proposed workflow in discriminating
motor patterns. The instructions of an expert clinician for a realistic gait disorder simulation
contributed to the quality of classification results. However, the framework has been tested
only on data related to locomotor actions, both normal and abnormal, performed by healthy
subjects, since this work was conceived as a feasibility study before application on actual
pathological gaits. Therefore, the proposed workflow should be evaluated by studying data
coming from people actually affected by gait disorders to test its usefulness in a clinical
scenario. In so doing, even the severity rating of such neuromotor disorders as Parkinson’s
disease [12–16] and ataxia [17] can be explored. Furthermore, since the motor actions have
been performed by people with advanced clinical knowledge, a successive experimental
campaign could include subjects with no expertise in gait disorders for the sake of even
higher data variability [59].
Secondly, only five walking patterns have been considered, since the samples of
the hemiplegic and equine gaits have not been distinguished according to the emulated
affected side; hence, a seven-class classification may be pursued to investigate whether the
framework effectively performs PGR even in cases of unilateral gait disorders, which may
be useful for the corresponding rehabilitation [9].
The type of abnormal walking patterns considered in this work, though in line with
most of the related works, is restricted to evident motor behaviors. Therefore, for the sake of
even greater usefulness in a clinical scenario, less obvious motor patterns such as walking
tremors [60] should be considered in the future. Another example is given by Parkinsonian
tremors, which could be further addressed in view of its previous successful simulation
by healthy subjects with slight amplitude differences with respect to actual pathological
subjects [61]. This may be carried out by conceiving some indexes to measure the deviation
of an individual’s gait pattern from the range typical of a healthy subject, thus tracking the
patients’ rehabilitative progress and the effectiveness of therapies [28,31,62,63].
Future research could also aim to develop an integrated explainable framework that
combines the strengths of attention mechanisms [41,64] and Layer-wise Relevance Propa-
gation [65]. These methods help in understanding which parts of the input data (i.e., IMU
component) contribute the most to the model predictions.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 14 of 17
With this in mind, the proposed gait recognition system can be enhanced to pursue
its seamless integration into either the clinical realm or a home application [36]. This may
be achieved by embedding the inertial sensors within e-textiles to increase the subject’s
comfort either in a rehabilitative path or in a remote-monitoring application.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.P., G.D. and V.B.; methodology, L.P., V.S., S.G., D.B., A.B.,
L.C., F.A., A.C., G.P., G.D. and V.B.; software, L.P., V.S. and S.G.; validation, L.P., V.S., S.G., G.P., G.D.
and V.B.; formal analysis, L.P., V.S., S.G., D.B., A.B., F.A., A.C., G.P., G.D. and V.B.; investigation, L.P.,
V.S., S.G., G.P., G.D. and V.B.; data curation, L.P., S.G. and G.P.; writing—original draft preparation,
L.P., V.S. and S.G.; writing—review and editing, L.P., V.S., S.G., D.B., A.B., L.C., F.A., A.C., G.P., G.D.
and V.B.; visualization, L.P., V.S., S.G., D.B., A.B., F.A., A.C. and G.P.; supervision, D.B., A.B., G.P.,
G.D. and V.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study was partially funded by the project ‘BRIEF—Biorobotics Research and In-
novation Engineering Facilities’ (Mission 4, ‘Istruzione e Ricerca’—Component 2, ‘Dalla ricerca
all’impresa’—Investment 3.1, ‘Fondo per la realizzazione di un sistema integrato di infrastrutture di
ricerca e innovazione’, funded by the European Union—NextGenerationEU, CUP: J13C22000400007)
and by the research project “PNRR-POC-2022-12375705—Diagnostic system for assessing haptic
communication abilities and impairments during interactive locomotion”, Mission 6: “Salute”, Com-
ponent 2: “Innovazione, ricerca e digitalizzazione del Servizio Sanitario”, CUP: D93C22001330007,
funded by the European Union—NextGenerationEU.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee
IRCCS Istituto Oncologico “Gabriella Serio” (prot. n. 312 del 09/05/2024) and was conducted in
accordancewiththeDeclarationofHelsinki, aspartoftheprojectSAALUS—SmartAmbientAssisted
Living Ubiquitous System project, approved by the Italian Ministry of Economic Development
(F/180018/01-05/X43 D.M. 0001812 6 June 2022).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in
the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author. Moreover, some reference videos of the simulated gait disorders can be
provided upon request.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank all the subjects for their voluntary study participation. The
authorsarealsothankfultoVitoProsciafortherecruitmentofparticipantsamongthephysiotherapists
and physiatrists of the IRCCS Maugeri of Bari (Italy).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Mekruksavanich, S.; Jitpattanakul, A. Deep Residual Network with a CBAM Mechanism for the Recognition of Symmetric and
Asymmetric Human Activity Using Wearable Sensors. Symmetry 2024, 16, 554. [CrossRef]
2. Robles, D.; Benchekroun, M.; Lira, A.; Taramasco, C.; Zalc, V.; Irazzoky, I.; Istrate, D. Real-time Gait Pattern Classification Using
Artificial Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for Living Environment,
MetroLivEn 2022, Cosenza, Italy, 25–27 May 2022; pp. 76–80. [CrossRef]
3. Suglia, V.; Palazzo, L.; Bevilacqua, V.; Passantino, A.; Pagano, G.; D’Addio, G. A Novel Framework Based on Deep Learning
Architecture for Continuous Human Activity Recognition with Inertial Sensors. Sensors 2024, 24, 2199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Gao, J.; Gu, P.; Ren, Q.; Zhang, J.; Song, X. Abnormal Gait Recognition Algorithm Based on LSTM-CNN Fusion Network. IEEE
Access 2019, 7, 163180–163190. [CrossRef]
5. Kim, W.; Kim, Y. Abnormal Gait Recognition based on Integrated Gait Features in Machine Learning. In Proceedings of
the 2021 IEEE 45th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Madrid, Spain, 12–16 July 2021;
pp. 1683–1688. [CrossRef]
6. Guo, Y.; Deligianni, F.; Gu, X.; Yang, G.Z. 3D Canonical Pose Estimation and Abnormal Gait Recognition with a Single RGB-D
Camera. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2019, 4, 3617–3624. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 15 of 17
7. Ghobadi, M.; Tarkesh Esfahani, E. A Robust Automatic Gait Monitoring Approach Using A Single Imu for Home-Based
Applications. J. Mech. Med. Biol. 2017, 17, 1750077. [CrossRef]
8. Han, Y.C.; Wong, K.; Murray, I. Comparison of Machine Learning Methods for the Construction of a Standalone Gait Diagnosis
Device. IET Signal Process. 2020, 14, 243–250. [CrossRef]
9. Oh, Y.; Choi, S.A.; Shin, Y.; Jeong, Y.; Lim, J.; Kim, S. Investigating Activity Recognition for Hemiparetic Stroke Patients Using
Wearable Sensors: A Deep Learning Approach with Data Augmentation. Sensors 2024, 24, 210. [CrossRef]
10. Jinnovart, T.; Cai, X.; Thonglek, K. Abnormal Gait Recognition in Real-Time using Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proceedings
of the 2020 59th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Jeju, Republic of Korea, 14–18 December 2020; pp. 972–977.
[CrossRef]
11. Mokhlespour Esfahani, M.I.; Nussbaum, M. Using Smart Garments to Differentiate among Normal and Simulated Abnormal
Gaits. J. Biomech. 2019, 93, 70–76. [CrossRef]
12. Amboni, M.; Ricciardi, C.; Adamo, S.; Nicolai, E.; Volzone, A.; Erro, R.; Cuoco, S.; Cesarelli, G.; Basso, L.; D’Addio, G.; et al.
Machine learning can predict mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurol. 2022, 13, 1010147. [CrossRef]
13. Loconsole, C.; Cascarano, G.D.; Lattarulo, A.; Brunetti, A.; Trotta, G.F.; Buongiorno, D.; Bortone, I.; De Feudis, I.; Losavio, G.;
Bevilacqua, V.; et al. A comparison between ANN and SVM classifiers for Parkinson’s disease by using a model-free computer-
assisted handwriting analysis based on biometric signals. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 8–13 July 2018; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
14. Cascarano, G.D.; Brunetti, A.; Buongiorno, D.; Trotta, G.F.; Loconsole, C.; Bortone, I.; Bevilacqua, V., A Multi-modal Tool
Suite for Parkinson’s Disease Evaluation and Grading. In Neural Approaches to Dynamics of Signal Exchanges; Esposito, A.,
Faundez-Zanuy, M., Morabito, F.C., Pasero, E., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 257–268. [CrossRef]
15. Buongiorno, D.; Bortone, I.; Cascarano, G.D.; Trotta, G.F.; Brunetti, A.; Bevilacqua, V. A low-cost vision system based on the
analysis of motor features for recognition and severity rating of Parkinson’s Disease. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 2019, 19, 243.
[CrossRef]
16. Buongiorno, D.; Trotta, G.F.; Bortone, I.; Di Gioia, N.; Avitto, F.; Losavio, G.; Bevilacqua, V. Assessment and Rating of Movement
Impairment in Parkinson’s Disease Using a Low-Cost Vision-Based System. In Intelligent Computing Methodologies, Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference, Wuhan, China, 15–18 August 2018; Huang, D.S., Gromiha, M.M., Han, K., Hussain, A., Eds.;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 777–788.
17. Cesarelli, G.; Donisi, L.; Coccia, A.; Amitrano, F.; Biancardi, A.; Lanzillo, B.; D’Addio, G. Ataxia and Parkinson’s disease patients
classification using tree-based machine learning algorithms fed by spatiotemporal features: A pilot study. In Proceedings of
the 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Medical Measurements and Applications, Messina, Italy, 22–24 June 2022; pp. 1–6.
[CrossRef]
18. Lee, H.S.; Ryu, H.; Lee, S.U.; Cho, J.s.; You, S.; Park, J.H.; Jang, S.H. Analysis of Gait Characteristics Using Hip-Knee Cyclograms
in Patients with Hemiplegic Stroke. Sensors 2021, 21, 7685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Sung, J.; Han, S.; Park, H.; Hwang, S.; Lee, S.J.; Park, J.W.; Youn, I. Classification of Stroke Severity Using Clinically Relevant
Symmetric Gait Features Based on Recursive Feature Elimination With Cross-Validation. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 119437–119447.
[CrossRef]
20. Slijepcevic, D.; Zeppelzauer, M.; Gorgas, A.M.; Schwab, C.; Schüller, M.; Baca, A.; Breiteneder, C.; Horsak, B. Automatic
Classification of Functional Gait Disorders. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2018, 22, 1653–1661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Potluri, S.; Ravuri, S.; Diedrich, C.; Schega, L. Deep Learning based Gait Abnormality Detection using Wearable Sensor System. In
Proceedings of the 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC),
Berlin, Germany, 23–27 July 2019; pp. 3613–3619. [CrossRef]
22. Verlekar, T.T.; Albuquerque, P.; Ducla Soares, L.; Correia, P.L. Using Transfer Learning for Classification of Gait Pathologies. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), Madrid, Spain, 3–6 December 2018.
23. Yin, S.; Chen, C.; Zhu, H.; Wang, X.; Chen, W. Neural Networks for Pathological Gait Classification Using Wearable Motion
Sensors. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), Nara, Japan, 17–19 October
2019; pp. 1–4.
24. Albuquerque, P.; Machado, J.; Verlekar, T.T.; Soares, L.D.; Correia, P.L. Remote Pathological Gait Classification System. IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inform. 2021, 11, 1824.
25. Dolatabadi, E.; Taati, B.; Mihailidis, A. An Automated Classification of Pathological Gait Using Unobtrusive Sensing Technology.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2017, 25, 2336–2346. [CrossRef]
26. Chakma, A.; Faridee, A.Z.M.; Ghosh, I.; Roy, N. Domain Adaptation for Inertial Measurement Unit-based Human Activity
Recognition: A Survey. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.06489.
27. Bianchi, V.; Bassoli, M.; Lombardo, G.; Fornacciari, P.; Mordonini, M.; De Munari, I. IoT Wearable Sensor and Deep Learning: An
Integrated Approach for Personalized Human Activity Recognition in a Smart Home Environment. IEEE Internet Things J. 2019,
6, 8553–8562. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 16 of 17
28. Ma, H.; Liao, W.H. Human Gait Modeling and Analysis Using a Semi-Markov Process With Ground Reaction Forces. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2017, 25, 597–607. [CrossRef]
29. Yadav, S.K.; Tiwari, K.; Pandey, H.M.; Akbar, S.A. A review of multimodal human activity recognition with special emphasis on
classification, applications, challenges and future directions. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2021, 223, 106970. [CrossRef]
30. Bortone, I.; Buongiorno, D.; Lelli, G.; Di Candia, A.; Cascarano, G.D.; Trotta, G.F.; Fiore, P.; Bevilacqua, V. Gait Analysis and
Parkinson’s Disease: Recent Trends on Main Applications in Healthcare. In Converging Clinical and Engineering Research on
Neurorehabilitation III, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on NeuroRehabilitation (ICNR2018), Pisa, Italy, 16–20 October
2018; Masia, L., Micera, S., Akay, M., Pons, J.L., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 1121–1125.
31. Mohammadian Rad, N.; Van Laarhoven, T.; Furlanello, C.; Marchiori, E. Novelty Detection using Deep Normative Modeling for
IMU-Based Abnormal Movement Monitoring in Parkinson’s Disease and Autism Spectrum Disorders. Sensors 2018, 18, 3533.
[CrossRef]
32. Iyer, K.M. Clinical Examination in Orthopedics; Springer Science & Business Media: London, UK, 2011.
33. Thomas, S.S.; Moore, C.; Kelp-Lenane, C.; Norris, C. Simulated gait patterns: The resulting effects on gait parameters, dynamic
electromyography, joint moments, and physiological cost index. Gait Posture 1996, 4, 100–107. [CrossRef]
34. Jun, K.; Lee, K.; Lee, S.; Lee, H.; Kim, M.S. Hybrid Deep Neural Network Framework Combining Skeleton and Gait Features for
Pathological Gait Recognition. Bioengineering 2023, 10, 1133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. D’Addio, G.; Evangelista, S.; Donisi, L.; Biancardi, A.; Andreozzi, E.; Pagano, G.; Arpaia, P.; Cesarelli, M. Development of a
Prototype E-Textile Sock. In Proceedings of the 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), Berlin, Germany, 23–27 July 2019; pp. 17498–1752. [CrossRef]
36. Diraco, G.; Rescio, G.; Siciliano, P.; Leone, A. Review on Human Action Recognition in Smart Living: Sensing Technology,
Multimodality, Real-Time Processing, Interoperability, and Resource-Constrained Processing. Sensors 2023, 23, 5281. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
37. Pagano, G.; Donisi, L.; Marsico, V.; Losavio, E.; Cesarelli, M.; D’Addio, G. Reliability of kinematic parameters related to the
Timed Up and Go Test in patients with gait impairments. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Medical
Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), Neuchâtel, Switzerland, 23–25 June 2021; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
38. Stanford Medicine 25 Gaits. Available online: https://stanfordmedicine25.stanford.edu/the25.html (accessed on 1 December 2024).
39. Jaén-Vargas, M.; Leiva, K.M.R.; Fernandes, F.; Goncalves, S.B.; Silva, M.T.; Lopes, D.S.; Olmedo, J.J.S. Effects of sliding window
variation in the performance of acceleration-based human activity recognition using deep learning models. PeerJ Comput. Sci.
2022, 8, e1052. [CrossRef]
40. Diraco, G.; Rescio, G.; Caroppo, A.; Manni, A.; Leone, A. Human Action Recognition in Smart Living Services and Applications:
Context Awareness, Data Availability, Personalization, and Privacy. Sensors 2023, 23, 6040. [CrossRef]
41. Sibilano, E.; Buongiorno, D.; Lassi, M.; Grippo, A.; Bessi, V.; Sorbi, S.; Mazzoni, A.; Bevilacqua, V.; Brunetti, A. Understanding the
Role of Self-Attention in a Transformer Model for the Discrimination of SCD From MCI Using Resting-State EEG. IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Inform. 2024, 28, 3422–3433. [CrossRef]
42. Brunetti, A.; Buongiorno, D.; Altini, N.; Bevilacqua, V. Enabling Technologies for Optimized Diagnosis, Therapy and Rehabili-
tation: Obtained Results and Future Works. In Ambient Assisted Living; Bochicchio, M., Siciliano, P., Monteriù, A., Bettelli, A.,
De Fano, D., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2024; pp. 206–223.
43. Casilari, E.; Álvarez Marco, M.; García-Lagos, F. A Study of the Use of Gyroscope Measurements in Wearable Fall Detection
Systems. Symmetry 2020, 12, 649. [CrossRef]
44. Popescu, A.C.; Mocanu, I.; Cramariuc, B. Fusion Mechanisms for Human Activity Recognition Using Automated Machine
Learning. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 143996–144014. [CrossRef]
45. Sawant, S.; Singh, A. Malaria Cell Detection Using Deep Neural Networks. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2406.20005.
46. Vo, H.Q.; Cicalese, P.A.; Seshan, S.; Rizvi, S.A.; Vathul, A.; Bueno, G.; Dorado, A.P.; Grabe, N.; Stolle, K.; Pesce, F.; et al.
Segmentation of diagnostic tissue compartments on whole slide images with renal thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs). arXiv
2023, arXiv:2311.14971.
47. Qureshi, U.R.; Rashid, A.; Altini, N.; Bevilacqua, V.; La Scala, M. Radiometric Infrared Thermography of Solar Photovoltaic
Systems: An Explainable Predictive Maintenance Approach for Remote Aerial Diagnostic Monitoring. Smart Cities 2024,
7, 1261–1288. [CrossRef]
48. Buongiorno, D.; Prunella, M.; Grossi, S.; Hussain, S.M.; Rennola, A.; Longo, N.; Di Stefano, G.; Bevilacqua, V.; Brunetti, A. Inline
Defective Laser Weld Identification by Processing Thermal Image Sequences with Machine and Deep Learning Techniques. Appl.
Sci. 2022, 12, 6455. [CrossRef]
49. Jaramillo, I.E.; Jeong, J.G.; Lopez, P.R.; Lee, C.H.; Kang, D.Y.; Ha, T.J.; Oh, J.H.; Jung, H.; Lee, J.H.; Lee, W.H.; et al. Real-Time
Human Activity Recognition with IMU and Encoder Sensors in Wearable Exoskeleton Robot via Deep Learning Networks.
Sensors 2022, 22, 9690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 260 17 of 17
50. Camardella, C.; Porcini, F.; Filippeschi, A.; Marcheschi, S.; Solazzi, M.; Frisoli, A. Gait Phases Blended Control for Enhancing
Transparency on Lower-Limb Exoskeletons. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2021, 6, 5453–5460. [CrossRef]
51. Lippi, V.; Filippeschi, A.; Camardella, C.; Porcini, F.; Maurer, C.; Lencioni, L. EXOSMOOTH: Test of Innovative EXOskeleton
Control for SMOOTH Assistance, with and Without Ankle Actuation. In Proceedings of the 2022 17th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Sapporo, Japan, 7–10 March 2022; pp. 890–894. [CrossRef]
52. Lippi, V.; Camardella, C.; Filippeschi, A.; Porcini, F. Identification of gait phases with neural networks for smooth transparent
control of a lower limb exoskeleton. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation
and Robotics, ICINCO 2021, Online, 6–8 July 2021; pp. 171–178. [CrossRef]
53. Camardella, C.; Lippi, V.; Porcini, F.; Bassani, G.; Lencioni, L.; Mauer, C.; Haverkamp, C.; Avizzano, C.A.; Frisoli, A.; Filippeschi, A.
User-centered evaluation of the Wearable Walker lower limb exoskeleton, preliminary assessment based on the Experience
protocol Sensors 2024, 24, 5358. [CrossRef]
54. Chiaradia, D.; Rinaldi, G.; Solazzi, M.; Vertechy, R.; Frisoli, A. Design and Control of the Rehab-Exos, a Joint Torque-Controlled
Upper Limb Exoskeleton. Robotics 2024, 13, 32. [CrossRef]
55. Rinaldi, G.; Tiseni, L.; Xiloyannis, M.; Masia, L.; Frisoli, A.; Chiaradia, D. Flexos: A Portable, SEA-Based Shoulder Exoskeleton
with Hyper-redundant Kinematics for Weight Lifting Assistance. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE World Haptics Conference
(WHC), Delft, The Netherlands, 10–13 July 2023; pp. 252–258. [CrossRef]
56. Lotti, N.; Xiloyannis, M.; Missiroli, F.; Chiaradia, D.; Frisoli, A.; Sanguineti, V.; Masia, L. Intention-detection strategies for
upper limb exosuits: Model-based myoelectric vs dynamic-based control. In Proceedings of the 2020 8th IEEE RAS/EMBS
International Conference for Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), New York, NY, USA, 29 November–1 December
2020; pp. 410–415. [CrossRef]
57. Nguyen, H.; Lebel, K.; Boissy, P.; Bogard, S.; Goubault, E.; Duval, C. Auto detection and segmentation of daily living activities
during a Timed Up and Go task in people with Parkinson’s disease using multiple inertial sensors. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2017,
14, 26. [CrossRef]
58. Prunella, M.; Scardigno, R.M.; Buongiorno, D.; Brunetti, A.; Longo, N.; Carli, R.; Dotoli, M.; Bevilacqua, V. Deep Learning for
Automatic Vision-Based Recognition of Industrial Surface Defects: A Survey. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 43370–43423. [CrossRef]
59. Diraco, G.; Manni, A.; Leone, A. Integrating Abnormal Gait Detection with Activities of Daily Living Monitoring in Ambient
Assisted Living: A 3D Vision Approach. Sensors 2024, 24, 82. [CrossRef]
60. Stein, R.B.; Oĝuztöreli, M.N. Tremor and other oscillations in neuromuscular systems. Biol. Cybern. 1976, 22, 147–157. [CrossRef]
61. Burkhard, P.R.; Langston, J.; Tetrud, J.W. Voluntarily simulated tremor in normal subjects. Neurophysiol. Clin./Clin. Neurophysiol.
2002, 32, 119–126. : 10.1016/S0987-7053(02)00296-4 [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Wang, L.; Sun, Y.; Li, Q.; Liu, T.; Yi, J. IMU-Based Gait Normalcy Index Calculation for Clinical Evaluation of Impaired Gait. IEEE
J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2021, 25, 3–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Suglia, V.; Brunetti, A.; Pasquini, G.; Caputo, M.; Marvulli, T.M.; Sibilano, E.; Della Bella, S.; Carrozza, P.; Beni, C.; Naso, D.; et al.
A Serious Game for the Assessment of Visuomotor Adaptation Capabilities during Locomotion Tasks Employing an Embodied
Avatar in Virtual Reality. Sensors 2023, 23, 5017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Kim, J.; Seo, H.; Naseem, M.T.; Lee, C.S. Pathological-Gait Recognition Using Spatiotemporal Graph Convolutional Networks
and Attention Model. Sensors 2022, 22, 4863. [CrossRef]
65. Horst, F.; Lapuschkin, S.; Samek, W.; Müller, K.R.; Schöllhorn, W.I. What is Unique in Individual Gait Patterns? Understanding
and Interpreting Deep Learning in Gait Analysis. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1808.04308.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- PAGE 18 ---
